भारतीय ररज़र्व बैंक
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
www.rbi.org.in
वर्वियमि वर्भाग, केंद्रीय कायावलय , केंद्रीय कायावलय भर्ि, 12र्ीीं/13र्ीीं मींविल, शहीद भगत व ींह मागव, फोर्व, म ींबई - 400001
फोि : 022-22661602, 22601000 फैक्स : 022-22705691
Department of Regulation, Central Office, Central Office Building, 12/13th floor, Shahid Bhagat Singh Marg, Fort,
Mumbai-400001, Tel No: 022-22661602, 22601000, Fax No-022-22705691
RBI/2025-26/07
DoR.HGG.GOV.No.1/18.10.010/2025-26
April 1, 2025
The Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer
All Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
Dear Sir/Madam,
Master Circular on Board of Directors - UCBs
Please refer to our Master Circular DoR.HGG.GOV.No.1/18.10.010/2024-25 dated
April 1, 2024 on the captioned subject (available at RBI website www.rbi.org.in). The
enclosed Master Circular consolidates and updates all the instructions / guidelines
on the subject issued till date.
Yours faithfully
(Manoranjan Padhy)
Chief General Manager
Withdrawn
- 2 -
Master Circular - Board of Directors - UCBs
S.No.
Content
Page no.
Constitution of Board of Directors
3-4
Role of Directors
4-6
Committees of the Board
7-8
Calendar of Reviews – Matters to be placed before the
Board of Directors
Donations to trusts and institutions where directors or
their relatives hold position or are interested
8-9
Payment of fees and allowances to Directors
Annex 1 - Recommendation made by the Madhava
Das Committee on Urban Co-operative Banks with
regard to Board of Directors
10-12
Annex 2 - Reviews to be submitted to the Board of
Directors of primary (urban) co-operative banks
13-15
Appendix – List of Circulars consolidated in the
Master Circular
16-17
Withdrawn
- 3 -
Master Circular - Board of Directors – UCBs
1. Constitution of Board of Directors
1.1 Primary (urban) co-operative banks (UCBs or banks) have been functioning
under the regulation and supervision of Reserve Bank of India (Reserve Bank or
RBI) in terms of the powers vested in it inter alia under the Banking Regulation Act,
1949 (BR Act) and the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (RBI Act).
1.2 The directors on the boards of UCBs must be knowledgeable and persons of
high integrity. To ensure professionalism in the Board, banks should, at all times,
have at least two professional directors, i.e., persons with suitable banking
experience (at middle/senior management level) or with relevant professional
qualification in the fields of law, accountancy or finance. Banks should also have a
suitable provision in their byelaws to ensure this. However, these instructions would
not be insisted upon in case of Salary Earners' Banks in view of the nature of their
membership.
1.3 UCBs (other than those having deposit size less than Rs.100 crore and salary
earners’ banks) are also required to constitute a Board of Management (BoM) to
facilitate professional management and focused attention to their banking-related
activities, by making suitable amendments to their bye-laws, in accordance with the
guidelines contained in RBI circular DoR(PCB).BPD.Cir.No.8/12.05.002/2019-20
dated December 31, 2019.
1.4 Since the directors are elected from amongst the members (except co-opted and
nominated directors), the persons who are not eligible for admission even as
members cannot become directors of UCBs. In particular, persons engaged in
money lending, financing and investment activities, either in individual capacity or as
proprietor/partner/employee/director of any concern as also those convicted of any
criminal offences including moral turpitude are ineligible in terms of clause b (ii) of
the model by-law no.9 and/or the provisions contained in the co-operative societies
law concerned. Besides, certain eligibility/qualification/disqualification criteria for
becoming director in a UCB are also prescribed in the BR Act and the co-operative
laws concerned.
Withdrawn
- 4 -
1.5 The recommendations made by the “Committee on Urban Co-operative Banks”,
headed by Shri Madhava Das, regarding the Board of Directors of UCBs and
recommended by the Reserve Bank for adoption by the banks are given in Annex 1.
1.6 It was observed during the course of supervisory reviews that some of the UCBs
have adopted the practice of creating honorary designations (remunerated or
otherwise) / conferring titles at Board level, such as Chairman Emeritus, Group
Chairman, etc., which are not recognised in applicable statutes or regulations. While
such positions/titles may be indicative of certain privileges/rights for the incumbent to
access all board materials and participate in board/committee meetings, enforcing
liability or obligations on such person may be difficult. Such positions may be seen
as creating conflicts of interest as well as creation of a parallel or shadow authority
impeding effective and independent functioning of the legally constituted board in the
best interest of all its stakeholders. As such, UCBs are directed not to create any
honorary positions/titles at Board level or confer such titles that are non-statutory in
nature1.
2. Role of directors
2.1 The Board of Directors (BOD or Board) is primarily concerned with formulation of
policies keeping in view the applicable statutory provisions and the guidelines issued
by the RBI. The Board should also exercise overall supervision and control over the
functioning of the bank, leaving the day-to-day administration to the Managing
Director (MD) / Chief Executive Officer (CEO).
2.2 It should be ensured that all circulars and other material relating to policies
issued by the RBI are placed before the Board for information and appropriate
action.
2.3 Directors of UCBs are advised to be guided inter alia by the following guidelines2:
The directors should attend Board meetings regularly and effectively. They
should study the Board papers thoroughly and use the good offices of the
MD/CEO for eliciting any information at the Board meetings. They should,
however, not directly call for papers/files/notes recorded by various
1 UCBs were also directed to eliminate any such existing position/titles by April 20, 2023.
2 These guidelines are not meant to replace or supersede the specified duties, responsibilities, rights
or obligations of the Board of Directors outlined / laid down in the relevant statutes.
Withdrawn
- 5 -
departments for scrutiny, etc. in respect of agenda items to be discussed
in the meetings.
ii.
Management, on its part, is expected to furnish full facts and complete
papers to the directors well in advance as also all additional
information/clarification that the directors may seek before taking a
decision. The directors are expected to ensure confidentiality of the Bank's
agenda papers/notes. They should not reveal any information relating to
any constituent of the bank to anyone as they are under the oath of
secrecy and fidelity.
iii.
The directors should involve themselves thoroughly in the matter of
formulation of general policy and ensure that performance of the bank is
monitored adequately at the Board level. They should not issue/give any
instructions/direction to any individual officer/employee of the bank in any
manner, and should also discourage the individual officer/employee or
unions from approaching them in any manner.
iv.
The directors should be familiar with the broad objectives of the bank and
the policies laid down by the Reserve Bank. They should analyse the
trends of economy, assist in the discharge of management's responsibility
to public and formulation of measures to improve customer service and be
generally of constructive assistance to the bank management.
The Board should function in a cohesive manner and provide proper
leadership to manage the affairs of the bank on smooth and efficient lines.
The directors must work as a team and in the spirit of co-operation and
should give as much of their wisdom, guidance and knowledge as possible
to the management.
vi.
The Directors should bestow attention on the following aspects of the
bank's working:
a) Compliance with the regulatory policies of the RBI
b) Observance of Cash Reserve and Statutory Liquidity Ratios
c) Efficient management of funds and improving profitability
Withdrawn
- 6 -
d) Priority sector/weaker section lending targets
e) Ensure that bank's funds are utilized in a proper and judicious manner
for the benefit of general members
f) Prompt recoveries and reduction of overdues
g) Compliance with guidelines on income recognition, asset classification
and provisioning towards non-performing assets
h) Customer service
i) Review of action taken on RBI inspection report/statutory audit report
j) Development of a robust management information system
k) Reviews on items as prescribed by RBI
l) Vigilance, frauds and misappropriation of funds
m) Strengthening of internal control system and housekeeping, viz., proper
maintenance of books of accounts and periodical reconciliation
n) Computerization of operations
vii.
The directors should not involve themselves in any matter relating to
personnel administration such as appointment, transfer, posting or
promotion, or redressal of individual grievances of any employee. They
should not do anything which will interfere with and/or be subversive of
maintenance of discipline, good conduct and integrity of the staff.
viii.
The directors should not approach or exert influence for sanction of any
kind of facility by the bank. They should also not sponsor any loan
proposal, buildings or sites for bank's premises, enlistment or
empanelment of contractors, architects, doctors, lawyers, etc. At the same
time, they should not be prejudiced against individual proposals.
ix.
The directors should not participate in the Board discussion if a proposal in
which they are directly or indirectly interested comes up for discussion.
They should disclose their interest well in advance to the MD/CEO and the
Board.
The directors may indicate their directorship of the bank on their visiting
card or letter head, but the logos or distinctive design of the bank should
not be displayed on the visiting card / letter head.
Withdrawn
- 7 -
3. Committees of the Board
3.1 Audit Committee of the Board
3.1.1 In order to ensure and enhance the effectiveness of internal audit/inspection as
a management tool, an apex Audit Committee should be set up at the Board level for
overseeing and providing directions to the internal audit/inspection machinery and
other executives of the bank. The committee may consist of a chairman and
three/four directors, one or more of such directors being chartered accountant or
having experience in management, finance or accountancy and audit systems.
3.1.2 Audit Committee of the Board (ACB) should review the implementation of the
guidelines issued by the RBI and submit a note thereon to the Board at quarterly
intervals. The major duties/responsibilities of the ACB are given below:
The ACB should provide direction to and oversee the operations of the entire
audit function in the bank. The entire audit function will imply the organization,
operationalisation and quality control of internal audit and inspection within the
bank, follow up on the statutory audit of the bank and inspection report of the
Reserve Bank.
ii.
It should review the internal inspection/audit function in the bank – the system,
its quality and effectiveness in terms of follow up.  It should review the follow
up action on the internal inspection reports.  It should also specially focus on
the follow up on:
a) inter-branch adjustment accounts
b) unreconciled long outstanding entries in inter-branch accounts and inter-
bank accounts
c) arrears in balancing of books
d) frauds
e) all other major areas of housekeeping
iii.
Compliance with the statutory audit /concurrent audit /RBI inspection reports
iv.
Omission on the part of internal inspecting officials to detect serious
irregularities.
Withdrawn
- 8 -
Periodical review of the accounting policies/systems in the bank with a view to
ensuring greater transparency in the bank’s accounts and adequacy of
accounting controls.
3.2 Risk Management Committee of the Board
The primary responsibility of risk management lies with the Board. In order to focus
the required level of attention on various aspects of risk management, UCBs having
asset size of ₹5000 crore or above (as on March 31 of the previous year) are
advised to set up a Risk Management Committee (of the Board). The Board shall
decide the membership, scope of work and frequency of meeting of the Risk
Management Committee.
4. Calendar of reviews – Matters to be placed before the Board of Directors
It has been emphasized in paragraph 2.3 above that directors should bestow their
attention on the periodical reviews on important aspects of bank’s working. An
illustrative list of the reviews which should receive the attention of the directors as
also the periodicity at which these may be placed before the Board of Directors is
indicated in Annex 2.
5. Donations to trusts and institutions where directors or their relatives hold
position or are interested
5.1 With effect from August 30, 2013, UCBs are prohibited from giving donations to
trusts and institutions, where directors, and/or their relatives hold a position or are
interested, even within the permissible ceiling of 1% of the published profit of the
bank for the previous year.
5.2 For the purpose of this paragraph, a person shall be deemed to be a relative of
another, if and only if,:-
a) they are members of a Hindu Undivided Family; or
b) they are husband and wife; or
c) the one is related to the other in the manner indicated below:
1. Father
2. Mother (including step-mother)
3. Son (including step-son)
4. Son's wife
Withdrawn
- 9 -
5. Daughter (including step-daughter)
6. Daughter's husband.
7. Brother (including step-brother)
8. Brother's wife
9. Sister (including step-sister)
10. Sister's husband
5.3 For the purpose of this paragraph, the term “interest” shall mean “trust in which
directors/relatives of directors hold positions as trustees or are beneficiaries or
involved in any capacity in the working of the trust, which is likely to influence the
independence of the directors.
6. Payment of fees and allowances to directors
All expenses on the conduct of Board meetings may be shown against item 3 of P&L
Account i.e., “Directors and Local Committee Members – Fees and Allowance”.
Such expenses would include amounts actually paid to the directors and Local
Committee members as also amounts spent on their behalf for attending such
meetings.
Withdrawn
- 10 -
Annex 1
Recommendations made by Madhava Das Committee
on Urban Co-op. Banks with regard to Board of Directors
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
[Vide para 1.5]
1. Board to provide Representation to Branch Members
Representation on the Board of directors to members of branches is necessary with
a view to involving them in the management of the affairs of urban banks.  The
branches may be grouped according to the following categories for the purpose of
election of directors on the Board.
Branches within the limits of the head office, including only the branches
within about 25 Kms. from the head office town.
ii.
Branches falling outside the above limits but within the district.
iii.
Branches outside the district including those outside the state.
The representation may be based on membership and not on deposits or loan
business of branches.  Certain number of seats on the Board may be provided
exclusively for the head office town and every branch in a group may get
representation by rotation.
2. Eligibility for Director’s Post
The extent of shareholding should not be the determining factor in regard to
eligibility to hold office as director in an urban bank.  A director should be
elected by virtue of the confidence he commands among the members.  The
existing stipulation that a minimum share qualification for membership of the
Board should not be insisted upon is, therefore, salutary.
ii.
Those contesting for directorship in urban banks should have been members
for a minimum period of two years.  Similarly, members contesting for election
to the Board should have had a minimum deposit of any type of Rs.500 in the
urban bank concerned for a minimum period of two years continuously.
Withdrawn
- 11 -
3. Member’s Eligibility for Voting
To prevent instances of en-masse enrolment at the instance of certain vested
interests just before the general body meeting, primarily with a view to capturing
seats on the BODs and thereby destabilizing or dislodging the Boards of efficiently
managed urban banks, the members of a primary (urban) cooperative bank should
be allowed to participate in the election of its Board of Management3 only after
completion of a minimum period of 12 months from the date of acquiring
membership.
4. Women Representative on the Board
Where the scope for the organization of an urban bank exclusively for women is
limited in any area, the existing urban banks may give representation to women
members on the Board of Management and, wherever necessary, set up a separate
section to cater to the needs of women members.  At least one seat for women
shareholders may be reserved on the BODs.
5. Developmental Programmes for Board Members
The members on the BODs need regular programmes to develop themselves into a
competent policy and decision-making body.  These programmes may include
exposing the Board members to short-term orientation courses, workshops,
seminars and visits to other banks.  A suitable manual prepared by banks
themselves or Federations or Associations of urban banks may be one of the
methods of familiarizing the directors with their duties under the by-laws.  The
National Co-operative Union, in collaboration with the National Federation of Urban
Co-operative Banks and Credit Societies, and the State Federations or Associations
of urban banks, should apply itself to this very important task of educating and
training the Boards of Management of urban banks and draw-up co-coordinated
programmes for the purpose.
3 It may be noted that the term “Board of Management” used in these recommendations means Board of
Directors,
and
not
the
Board
Management
referred
the
RBI
circular
DoR(PCB).BPD.Cir.No.8/12.05.002/2019-20 dated December 31, 2019.
Withdrawn
- 12 -
6. Chief Executive to be on the Board
The Chief executive of an urban bank should preferably be a member of the BODs
i.e., he should be a Managing Director.
7. State Government Nominee on the Board
State Government may nominate their representatives on the Board of directors of
urban banks which are state partnered in regard to share capital.  The number of
such representatives should not exceed one-third of the total number of directors or
three, whichever is less.  Further, the directors nominated by the Government should
preferably be competent non-officials rather than officers from the Co-operative
Department.
Withdrawn
- 13 -
Annex 2
Reviews to be submitted to the Board of Directors of
primary (urban) co-operative banks
[Vide para 4]
I.  Monthly
1. (a)  Funds Management
(b)  Position regarding compliance with Cash Reserve/Statutory Liquidity Ratio
2. Trial Balance - Income/Expenditure Statements
3. Comparative position of deposits/advances
4. Credit proposals sanctioned under delegated authority including Temporary
Overdrafts
5. Report on serious irregularities/frauds/misappropriation which have come to light
during the month, if any
6. Comparative position of overdues
II.  Quarterly
1. Review
Deposit
Mobilisation/Target/
Achievement (bank as a whole)
April
(1-3)
July
(4-6)
October
(7-9)
January
(10-12)
2. Branch-wise performance of
deposits
and
advances
Targets/ Achievements
--do--
3. Review of at least 25% of large
borrowal accounts (Rs. 5 lakhs
and above in case of non-
scheduled banks and Rs. 10
lakhs and above in case of
scheduled banks - All such
accounts to be reviewed within
a year)
--do--
4. Review
recovery
performance as also action
against defaulters
--do--
5. Inter-branch
Reconciliation/
House-keeping
position
branches
--do--
Withdrawn
- 14 -
6. Action taken on major frauds/
serious irregularities
April
(1-3)
July
(4-6)
October
(7-9)
January
(10-12)
7. Review of action taken on
internal inspection reports and
compliance
--do--
8. Advances
directors/their
relatives - observance of RBI
guidelines
May
(1-3)
August
(4-6)
Novemb
(7-9)
February
(10-12)
9. Advances
single
party/
connected group - observance
of RBI guidelines
--do--
10. Review of Annual Business
Plan
April
(1-3)
July
(4-6)
October
(7-9)
January
(10-12)
III.  Half-yearly
1. Review of capital expenditure
vis-à-vis capital budget
January
(7-12)
July
(1-6)
2. Review
distribution
deposits/ advances and credit
deposit ratio
February
(7-12)
August
(1-6)
3. Review of action taken on
concurrent audit report
--do--
--do--
4. Review of action taken on the
findings
RBI
Inspection
Report/ Statutory Audit Report
April
(10-3)
October
(4-9)
5. Review
priority
sector/weaker section lendings
--do--
--do--
6. Review
performance
mobilisation of deposits under
NRE/FCNR scheme
--do--
--do--
7. Review
Credit
Card/
Merchant Banking Business
--do--
--do--
8. Review of action taken on
Audit/ Vigilance Committee of
the Directors
--do--
--do--
Withdrawn
- 15 -
9. Review of Customer Service
May
(10-3)
November
(4-9)
10. Review
security
arrangements
--do--
--do--
11. Half-yearly
working
results/
Review
performance
branches
income
and
expenditure
August
(10-3)
February
(4-9)
IV.  Annual
1. Review of bad debts proposed to be written-off
(April)
2. Report on frauds and action taken
(April)
3. Review of foreign exchange business
(April)
4. Review of donations made during the year
(April)
5. Bank's Balance Sheet, Profit & Loss A/c.,
Working results
(May)
6. Review of loss making branches
(May)
7. Analysis of wide variations in expenditure heads
(May)
8. Comprehensive note on income recognition, asset
classification
and
provisioning
towards
non-
performing assets
(May)
9. Review of human resources development and
training of staff
(June)
10. Review of mechanisation and computerization
(June)
11. Review of branch expansion/pending licences
(July)
12. Review of Statutory Audit Report
(September)
13. Review of Annual Business Plan
(February)
(Note:  Numbers 1 to 12 indicate the calendar months from January to December)
Withdrawn
- 16 -
Appendix
Master Circular - Boards of Directors - UCBs
List of Circulars consolidated in the Master Circular
No.
Circular No.
Date
Subject
DOR.GOV.REC.No.26/
18.10.004/2022-23
21.04.2022 Creation of Honorary Designations at
Board level in Urban Co-operative
Banks
DOR.CRE(DIR).REC.2
6/21.04.103/2021-22
(Partly)
25.06.2021 Appointment of Chief Risk Officer in
Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
DoR.(PCB).BPD.Cir.No.
8/12.05.002/2019-20
(Partly)
31.12.2019 Constitution of Board of Management
(BoM) in Primary (Urban) Co-operative
Banks (UCBs)
UBD.PCB.Cir.No.7/09.7
2.000/2013-14
30.08.2013 Donations to trusts and institutions
where directors, their relatives hold
position or are interested
UBD.PCB.Cir.No.41/09.
103.01/2007-08
21.04.2008 Professionalisation of Managements of
Urban Cooperative Banks
UBD.PCB.Cir.No.6/09.1
03.01/2007-08
18.09.2007
Professionalisation of Managements of
Urban Cooperative Banks
UBD.BPD.CIR
36/09.06.00/2002-03
20.02.2003 Audit Committee of Boards of Directors
UBD.PCB.CIR.POT.39/
09.10.3.01/2001-02
05.04.2002 Professionalisation
boards
directors of primary (urban) co-operative
banks
UBD.POT.73/09.06.00/
2000-01
12.07.2001
Audit Committee of Board of Directors
UBD.No.Plan(PCB)12/0
9.08.00/2000-01
15.11.2000 Calendar of reviews - Matters to be
placed before Board of Directors of
cooperative Banks
UBD.No.I&L (PCBs)
39/12.05.00/96-97
07.02.1997 Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (AACS) –
Section 29 – Submission of Annual
Balance Sheet and Profit & Loss
Account – Payment of Fees and
Allowances to Directors
UBD.No.I&L/(PCBs)
41/12.05.00/96-97
27.02.1997 Banking
Regulation
Act,1949
(AS
applicable to Co-operative Societies) –
Section 29- Submission of Annual
Balance Sheet and Profit and Loss
Account – Payment of Fees and
Allowances to Directors
UBD.No.Plan.(PCB).11/
09.08.00/94-95
02.08.1994 Calendar of Reviews - Matters to be
placed before the Board of Directors of
primary (urban) co-operative banks.
Withdrawn
- 17 -
UBD.No.Plan.(PCB).09/
09.06.00/94-95
25.07.1994 Overseeing the internal audit function in
banks setting up of Audit Committee of
Boards
UBD.No.Plan.(PCB).CI
R.55/09.08.00/93-94
11.02.1994 Board of Directors of primary (urban)
co-operative banks - Professionalisation
and their role -  Dos and Don’ts
Withdrawn