वित्‍तीय‍समािेशन‍और‍विकास‍विभाग, केन्द्रीय‍कायाालय,10 िी‍मंविल,‍केंरीय‍कायाालय‍भिन, शहीद‍भगतससंह‍मागा,पोस्ट‍बॉक्स‍सं. 10014,‍म ंबई -400001
Financial Inclusion & Development Dept, Central Office,10th Floor, Central Office Building, Shahid Bhagat Singh Marg, P.B.No.10014, Mumbai-1
टेली Tel:022-22601000 फैक्सः 91-22-22621011/22610943/22610948 ई-मेल : cgmincfidd@rbi.org.in
सहंदी आसान है, इसका प्रयोग‍बढ़ाइए।
“चेतािनी:
ररज़िा‍बैंकद्वारा‍मेल-डाक,‍एसएमएस‍या‍फोन‍कॉल‍के‍िररए‍ककसी‍की‍भी‍व्‍यविगत‍िानकारी‍िैसे‍बैंक‍के‍खाते‍का‍ब्‍यौरा,‍पासिडा‍आकद‍नहीं‍मांगी‍िाती‍है।‍यह‍धन‍रखने‍या‍देने‍का‍प्रस्‍ताि‍भी‍
नहीं‍करता‍है।‍ऐसे‍प्रस्‍तािों‍का‍ककसी‍भी‍तरीके‍से‍ििाब‍मत‍दीविए।"
Caution: RBI never sends mails, SMSs or makes calls asking for personal information like bank account details, passwords, etc. It never keeps or
offers funds to anyone. Please do not respond in any manner to such offers.
RBI/2025-26/04
FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.No.03/02.01.001/2025-26                                       April 01, 2025
The Chairman/Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer
SLBC/UTLBC Convenor Banks/Lead Banks
Madam/Dear Sir,
Master Circular – Lead Bank Scheme
The Reserve Bank of India has issued a number of guidelines/ instructions on Lead
Bank Scheme from time to time. This Master Circular consolidates the relevant
guidelines/ instructions issued by Reserve Bank of India on Lead Bank Scheme up to
March 31, 2025 as listed in the Appendix I.
2. This Master Circular has been placed on the RBI website https://www.rbi.org.in
Yours faithfully,
(Nisha Nambiar)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge
Encl.: As above
Structure
Introduction
Fora under Lead Bank Scheme
2.1
Block Level Bankers’ Committee
2.2
District Consultative Committee (DCC)
2.2.1
Constitution of DCC
2.2.2
Conduct of DCC Meetings
2.2.3
Agenda for DCC Meetings
2.2.4
Role of LDMs
2.2.5
Quarterly Public Meeting and Grievance Redressal
2.2.6
District Level Review Committee (DLRC) Meetings
2.2.7
DCC/DLRC meetings – Annual Calendar of Meetings
2.3
State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC)
2.3.1
Constitution of SLBC
2.3.2
Conduct of SLBC Meetings
2.3.3
Revised Agenda for SLBC Meetings
2.3.4
SLBC – Yearly Calendar of Meetings
2.3.5
SLBC Website – Standardization of information/data
2.3.6
Liaison with State Government
2.3.7
Capacity Building/Training/Sensitization Programmes
Implementation of Lead Bank Scheme
3.1
Preparation of credit plans
3.2
Potential Linked Credit Plans (PLPs)
3.3
Monitoring the performance of credit plans
3.4
Revised mechanism of Data Flow for LBS fora meetings
Assignment of Lead Bank Responsibility
Banking Penetration
5.1
Roadmap for provision of banking services in unbanked villages
5.2
Roadmap for opening brick and mortar branches in villages with
population more than 5000 without a bank branch of a scheduled
commercial bank
5.3
Aligning roadmap for unbanked villages having population more than
5000 with revised guidelines on Branch Authorisation Policy
5.4
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion (NSFI): 2019-2024 – Universal
Access to Financial Services
Credit Deposit Ratio
6.1
CD Ratio of banks in Rural and Semi-Urban Areas
6.2
Implementation of the recommendations of Expert Group on CD Ratio
Direct Benefit Transfer
Service Area Approach (SAA)
8.1
Dispensing with ‘No Due Certificate’
Enhancing Farmers’ Income
Expanding and Deepening of Digital Payments Ecosystem
Introduction
(i) The genesis of the Lead Bank Scheme (LBS) can be traced to the Study Group
headed by Prof. D. R. Gadgil (Gadgil Study Group) on the Organizational Framework
for Implementation of the Social Objectives, which submitted its report in October
1969. The Study Group drew attention to the fact that commercial banks did not have
adequate presence in rural areas and also lacked the required rural orientation. The
Study Group, therefore, recommended the adoption of an 'Area Approach' to evolve
plans and programmes for the development of an adequate banking and credit
structure in the rural areas.
(ii) A Committee of Bankers on Branch Expansion Programme of Public Sector Banks
(PSBs) appointed by the Reserve Bank of India under the Chairmanship of Shri F. K.
F. Nariman (Nariman Committee) endorsed the idea of an ‘Area Approach’ in its report
(November 1969), recommending that in order to enable the PSBs to discharge their
social responsibilities, each bank should concentrate on certain districts where it
should act as a 'Lead Bank'.
(iii) Pursuant to the above recommendations, the LBS was introduced by the Reserve
Bank of India (RBI) in December 1969. The Scheme aims at coordinating the activities
of banks and other developmental agencies through various fora to achieve the
objective of enhancing the flow of bank finance to the priority sector and other sectors
and to promote banks' role in the overall development of the rural sector. For
coordinating the activities in a district, a particular bank is assigned ‘Lead Bank’
responsibility of the district. The Lead Bank is expected to assume a leadership role
for coordinating the efforts of the credit institutions and the Government.
(iv) In view of the several changes that had taken place in the financial sector, the LBS
was last reviewed by the High Level Committee headed by Smt. Usha Thorat, former
Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India in 2009.
(v) The Committee held wide ranging discussions with various stakeholders, viz., State
Governments, banks, development institutions, academicians, NGOs, MFIs, etc. and
noted that the scheme has been useful in achieving its original objectives of
improvement in branch expansion, deposit mobilisation and lending to the priority
sector, especially in rural/semi urban areas. There was overwhelming consensus that
LBS needs to continue. Based on the recommendations of the Committee, guidelines
were issued to State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC) Convenor banks and Lead
Banks for implementation.
(vi) Envisaging greater role for private sector banks (PvSBs), Lead Banks were
advised to ensure that PvSBs are more closely and actively involved in the
implementation of the LBS, by leveraging on Information Technology and bringing in
their expertise in strategic planning. They were also advised to involve themselves in
preparation as well as implementation of the District Credit Plan (DCP).
(vii) Further, RBI constituted a “Committee of Executive Directors” of the Bank to study
the efficacy of the scheme and suggest measures for its improvement. Based on the
Committee’s recommendations and feedback received from various stakeholders,
certain ‘action points’ were issued to SLBC Convenors/Lead Banks and NABARD on
April 6, 2018.
2. Fora under Lead Bank Scheme
2.1 Block Level Bankers’ Committee
Block Level Bankers’ Committee (BLBC) is a forum for achieving coordination between
credit institutions and field level development agencies at the block level. The forum
prepares and reviews the implementation of the Block Credit Plan and resolves
operational issues in the implementation of the credit programmes of banks. The Lead
District Manager (LDM) of the district is the Chairman of the BLBC. All the banks
operating in the block including Small Finance Banks (SFBs), Wholly Owned
Subsidiaries (WOS) of Foreign Banks, Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), District Central
Co-operative Banks (DCCBs), Block Development Officer, technical officers in the
block such as extension officers for agriculture, industries and co-operatives are
members of the Committee. BLBC meetings are held at quarterly intervals. To
strengthen the BLBC forum, which operates at the base level of the LBS, it is
necessary that all branch managers attend BLBC meetings and enrich the discussions
with their valuable inputs. Controlling Heads of banks may also attend a few of the
BLBC meetings selectively. Participation by the District Development Manager (DDM)
of NABARD in BLBCs would ensure better and more meaningful discussions for the
development of the Block. Therefore, NABARD has been advised that DDMs should
attend all BLBC meetings in their districts and actively participate in the credit planning
exercise and review meetings at the block level. The Lead District Officer (LDO) of the
RBI selectively attends the BLBC meetings. Representatives of Panchayat Samitis are
also invited to attend the meetings at half yearly intervals to share their knowledge and
experience on rural development in the credit planning exercise. Payments Banks
(PBs) should also be invited to attend the meetings.
2.2 District Consultative Committee
2.2.1 Constitution of DCC
District Consultative Committees (DCCs) were constituted in the early seventies as a
common forum at the district level for bankers as well as Government agencies/
departments to facilitate coordination in implementing various developmental activities
under the LBS. The District Collector is the Chairman of the DCC meetings. RBI,
NABARD, all commercial banks including SFBs, WOS of Foreign Banks, RRBs, PBs,
State / District Central Co-operative Banks, various State Government departments
and allied agencies are the members of the DCC. The LDO represents the RBI as a
member of the DCC. The LDM convenes the DCC meetings. The Director of Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises Development Institute (MSME-DI) in the district is an
invitee in districts where MSME clusters are located to discuss issues concerning
MSMEs.
2.2.2 Conduct of DCC Meetings
i) DCC meetings should be convened by the Lead Banks at quarterly intervals.
ii) At the DCC level, sub-committees as appropriate, may be set up to work intensively
on specific issues and submit reports to the DCC for its consideration.
iii) DCC should give adequate feedback to the SLBC on various issues that need to
be discussed on a wider platform, so that these receive adequate attention at the
state level.
2.2.3 Agenda for DCC Meetings
While Lead Banks are expected to address the problems particular to the concerned
districts, some of the important areas common to all districts, which the Lead Banks
should invariably discuss in the fora are as under:
Review of progress under Financial Inclusion Plan (FIP)
ii)
Specific issues inhibiting and enabling IT enabled financial inclusion
iii)
Issues to facilitate 'enablers' and remove/minimise 'impeders' for banking
development for inclusive growth
iv)
Monitoring initiatives for providing 'Credit Plus' activities by banks and State
Governments, such as, setting up of Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs) and
RSETI1 type Training Institutes for providing skills and capacity building to
manage businesses
Scaling up financial literacy efforts to achieve financial inclusion
vi)
Review of performance of banks under District Credit Plan (DCP)
vii)
Flow of credit to priority sector and weaker sections of the society
viii)
Enhancing Farmers’ Income
ix)
Assistance under Government sponsored schemes
Grant of educational loans
xi)
Progress under SHG - bank linkage
xii)
SME financing and bottlenecks thereof, if any
xiii)
Timely submission of data by banks
xiv)
Review of relief measures (in case of natural calamities wherever applicable)
The above list is illustrative and not exhaustive. Lead Banks may include any other
agenda item considered necessary.
2.2.4 Role of Lead District Managers
As the effectiveness of the LBS depends on the dynamism of the District Collectors
and the LDMs, with the support of the Regional/ Zonal Office, the office of LDM should
be sufficiently strengthened with appropriate infrastructural support. Apart from the
provision of a separate office space, technical infrastructure like computers, printer,
data connectivity, etc. which are necessities for LDMs to discharge their core
responsibilities may be provided to their office without exception. Officers of
appropriate level, attitude and possessing requisite leadership skills should be posted
as LDMs. Additionally, it is suggested that a dedicated vehicle may be provided to
LDMs to facilitate closer liaison with bank officials, district administration officials as
1 Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs) should be more actively involved and monitored at various fora of LBS,
particularly at the DCC level. Focus should be on development of skills to enhance credit absorption capacity in the area and
renewing the training programmes towards sustainable micro enterprises. RSETIs should design specific programmes for each
district/ block, keeping in view the skill mapping and the potential of the region for necessary skill training and skill up gradation
of the rural youth in the district.
also to organise/ attend various financial literacy initiatives and meetings. The absence
of a specialist officer/ assistant for data entry/ analysis is a common and major issue
faced by LDMs. Liberty to hire the services of skilled computer operator/s may be given
to the LDMs to overcome the shortage of staff in case appropriate staff is not posted
at LDM’s office. Further, for successful functioning of the LBS, we expect Lead Banks
to go the extra mile to provide facilities over and above the bare minimum to these
critical field functionaries. Apart from the usual role of LDMs like convening meetings
of the DCC and District Level Review Committee (DLRC) and periodical meetings of
DDM/ LDO/ Government officials for resolving outstanding issues etc., the new
functions envisaged for LDMs include the following:
Monitoring the implementation of the District Credit Plan
ii)
Associate with the setting up of Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs), RSETIs by
banks
iii)
Associate with organizing financial literacy camps by FLCs and rural branches
of banks
iv)
Holding annual sensitisation workshops for banks and Government officials
with participation by NGOs/Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs)
Arranging for quarterly awareness and feedback public meetings, grievance
redressal, etc.
2.2.5 Quarterly Public Meeting and Grievance Redressal
The LDM should convene a quarterly public meeting at various locations in the district,
in coordination with the LDO of RBI, banks having presence in the area and other
stakeholders to generate awareness on the various banking policies and regulations
relating to the common person, obtain feedback from the public and provide grievance
redressal to the extent possible at such meetings or facilitate approaching the
appropriate machinery for such redressal.
2.2.6 District Level Review Committee Meetings
DLRC meetings are chaired by the District Collector and attended by members of the
DCC. Public Representatives, i.e., Local MPs/MLAs/ Zilla Parishad Chiefs are also
invited to these meetings. The DLRC meetings should be convened by the Lead Banks
at least once in a quarter. The DLRC is a forum to review the pace and quality of
implementation of various programmes under the LBS in the district. Hence,
association of non-officials is considered useful. Public representatives (MPs/ MLAs /
Zilla Panchayat Chiefs) shall invariably be invited to DLRC meetings. Therefore, Lead
Banks should fix the date of DLRC meetings with due regard to the convenience of
the representatives of the public, i.e., MPs/MLAs etc., to invite and involve them in all
functions conducted by the banks in their districts, such as opening of new banking
outlets, distribution of Kisan Credit Cards (KCCs), Self Help Group (SHG) credit
linkage programmes, etc. Responses to queries from public representatives need to
be accorded highest priority and attended to promptly. The forum may also have
representatives
State
Minority
Commission,
SC/ST
Corporation
and
representatives of the group of beneficiaries of rural lending. The forum may also
consider inviting people with expertise in fields, such as progressive farmers and local
industrialists as special invitees. The follow up of the DLRC’s decisions is required to
be discussed in the DCC meetings.
A compendium of instructions outlining the salient features of DLRC forum is given at
Annex V.
2.2.7 DCC/ DLRC meetings- Annual Calendar of Meetings
i) DCC and DLRC are the important fora facilitating coordination among commercial
banks, Government agencies and others at the district level to review and find
solutions to the problems hindering developmental activities. Therefore, it is necessary
that all the members participate and deliberate in these meetings. On a review of the
DCC/ DLRC meetings, it was observed that late receipt/ non-receipt of intimation of
the date of meetings, clash of dates with other events, commonality of dates, etc.,
hinder participation of members in these meetings, thus undermining the prime
objective of conducting the meetings.
ii) Lead Banks have, therefore, been advised to prepare an Annual Schedule of DCC
and DLRC meetings on calendar year basis for all districts, in consultation with the
Chairperson of the meetings, LDO of the RBI and Public Representatives in case of
DLRC. This yearly calendar should be prepared at the beginning of each year and
circulated to all members as advance intimation for blocking future dates to attend the
DCC and DLRC meetings and the meetings should be conducted as per the calendar.
While preparing the calendar, it should be ensured that DCC and DLRC meetings are
not held simultaneously. Lead Banks must fix dates of DLRC meetings, taking into
account the convenience of the MPs and circulate the agenda papers to MPs well in
advance.
2.3 State Level Bankers’ Committee
2.3.1 Constitution of SLBC
i) The State Level Bankers’ Committee was constituted in April 1977, as an apex inter-
institutional forum to create adequate coordination machinery in all States, on a
uniform basis for development of the State. SLBC is chaired by the Chairman/
Managing Director/ Executive Director of the Convenor Bank. It comprises
representatives of commercial banks including SFBs, WOS of Foreign Banks, RRBs,
PBs, State Cooperative Banks, RBI, NABARD, heads of Government departments
including representatives from National Commission for Scheduled Castes/Tribes,
National Horticulture Board, Khadi & Village Industries Commission, etc., and
representatives of financial institutions operating in a State, who come together and
sort out coordination problems at the policy implementation level. Representatives of
various organizations from different sectors of the economy like industry bodies, retail
traders, exporters, farmers’ unions, etc. are special invitees in the SLBC meetings for
discussing their specific problems, if any. SLBC meetings are held on quarterly basis.
The responsibility for convening the SLBC meetings would be of the SLBC Convenor
Bank of the State.
ii) Recognising that SLBCs, primarily as a committee of bankers at the State level, play
an important role in the development of the State, illustrative guidelines on the conduct
of SLBC meetings have been issued.
2.3.2 Conduct of SLBC Meetings
i) SLBC meetings are required to be held regularly at quarterly intervals. The meetings
are chaired by the Chairman/ Managing Director/ Executive Director of the Convenor
Bank and co-chaired by the Additional Chief Secretary or Development Commissioner
of the State concerned. In cases where the Managing Director/Chief Executive
Officer/Executive Director of the SLBC Convenor Bank is unable to attend SLBC
Meetings, the Regional Director/ GM(O-i-C) of the RBI shall co-chair the meetings
along with the Additional Chief Secretary/Development Commissioner of the State
concerned. A High Level of participation in SLBC/ UTLBC meetings ensures an
effective and desired outcome with meaningful discussion on issues of public policy of
both the Government of India and the Reserve Bank of India.
ii) The Chief Minister/Finance Minister and senior level officers of the State/RBI (of the
rank of Deputy Governor / Executive Director) may be invited to attend the SLBC
meetings. Further, the State Chief Ministers are encouraged to attend at least one
SLBC meeting in a year.
iii) State Level Bankers’ Committee meetings should primarily focus on policy issues
with participation of only the senior functionaries of the banks/ Government
Departments. All routine issues may be delegated to sub-committee(s) of the SLBC.
A Steering Sub-committee may be constituted in the SLBC to deliberate on agenda
proposals from different stakeholders and finalise a compact agenda for the SLBC
meetings. Typically, the sub-committee could consist of SLBC Convenor, RBI &
NABARD representatives & senior State Government representative from the
concerned department, e.g., Finance/ Institutional Finance and two to three banks
having major presence. The sub-committee may be chaired by the Convenor (i.e.,
generally General Manager) of the SLBC Convenor Bank.
iv) Other issue-specific sub-committees may be constituted as required. The sub-
committees may examine the specific issues relating to agriculture, micro,
small/medium industries/enterprises, handloom finance, export promotion and
financial inclusion, etc., in-depth and devise solutions/recommendations for adoption
by the full committee. They are expected to meet more frequently than the SLBC. The
composition of the sub-committees and subjects/ specific issues impeding/enabling
financial inclusion to be deliberated upon, may vary from State to State depending on
the specific problems/issues faced by the States.
v) The secretariat / offices of the SLBC should be sufficiently strengthened to enable
the SLBC Convenor Bank to effectively discharge its functions.
vi) The various fora at lower levels may give adequate feedback to the SLBC on issues
that need to be discussed on a wider platform.
vii) Several institutions and academicians are engaged in research, studies etc., that
have implications for sustainable development in agriculture and MSME sector.
Engaging with such research institutions and academicians would be useful in bringing
in new ideas for furthering the objectives of the LBS. The SLBCs may, therefore,
identify such academicians and researchers and invite them as 'special invitees' to
attend SLBC meetings occasionally both for adding value to the discussions and also
associate them with studies appropriate to the State. Other 'special invitees' may be
invited to attend SLBC meetings depending on the agenda items/issues to be
discussed in the meetings.
viii) The activities of NGOs in facilitating and channelling credit to the low income
households are expected to increase in the coming years. Several corporate houses
are also engaged in corporate social responsibility activities for sustainable
development. A linkage with such NGOs/Corporate houses operating in the area to
ensure that the NGOs/corporates provide the necessary 'credit plus' services can help
leverage bank credit for inclusive growth. Success stories could be presented in SLBC
meetings to serve as models that could be replicated.
2.3.3 Revised Agenda for SLBC Meetings
1. Review of financial inclusion initiatives, expansion of banking network and
Financial Literacy:
a. Status of opening of banking outlets in unbanked villages, CBS-enabled
banking outlets at the unbanked rural centres (URCs)
b. Review of operations of Business Correspondents (BCs) – hurdles/issues
involved
c. Progress in increasing digital modes of payment in the State, provision of
continuous connectivity with sufficient bandwidth, resolving connectivity issues/
connectivity options (Bharat Net, VSAT, etc.), installation of ATMs and PoS
machines and status of implementation of e-receipts and e-payments in the
State
d. Status of rollout of Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) in the State, Aadhaar seeding
and authentication
e. Review of inclusion of Financial Education in the School Curriculum, financial
literacy initiatives by banks (particularly digital financial literacy)
f. Creating awareness about various schemes, subsidies, facilities, e.g., crop
insurance, renewable energy
g. Review of efforts towards end-to-end projects involving all stakeholders in the
supply chain.
2. Review of credit disbursement by banks:
a. Achievement under ACP of the State, Priority Sector Lending
b. Discussion on lending towards government sponsored schemes (DAY-NRLM,
DAY-NULM, MUDRA, Stand-Up India, PMEGP, etc.) and impact of these
schemes
c. Flow of credit to MSMEs and affordable housing
d. KCC loan, crop insurance under PMFBY
e. Grant of Educational Loans
f. Progress under SHG-bank linkage.
3.  Enhancing Farmers’ Income
4. CD Ratio, Review of Districts with CD Ratio below 40% and working of Special
sub-committees of the DCC (SSC).
5. Position of NPAs in respect of schematic lending, Certificate Cases and Recovery
of NPAs.
6. Review of restructuring of loans in natural calamity affected districts in the State, if
any.
7. Discussion on policy initiatives of the Central/State Government/RBI (Industrial
Policy, MSME Policy, Agriculture Policy, Start-Up Policy, etc.), and expected
involvement of banks.
8. Discussion on improving rural infrastructure/ credit absorption capacity:
a. Any large project conceived by the State Government to help improve CD Ratio
b. Explore the scope of state-specific potential growth areas and the way forward
– choosing partner banks
c. Discussion on findings of region-focused studies, if any, and implementing the
suggested solutions
d. Identification of gaps in rural and agriculture infrastructure, which need
financing (rural godowns, solar power, agro processing, horticulture, allied
activities, agri-marketing, etc.)
e. Implementation of Model Land Leasing Act 2016 (exploring possibility)
9. Efforts towards skill development on mission mode, partnering with Krishi Vigyan
Kendra (KVK), Horticulture Mission, National Skill Development Corporation,
Agriculture Skill Council of India (ASCI), etc., including a review of functioning of
RSETIs.
10. Steps taken for improving land records, progress in digitization of land records and
seamless loan disbursements.
11. Sharing of success stories and new initiatives at the district level that can be
replicated in other districts or across the State.
12. Discussion on Market Intelligence Issues, e.g.:
a. Ponzi Schemes/ Illegal Activities of Unincorporated Bodies/ Firms/
Companies Soliciting Deposits from the Public
b. Banking Related Cyber Frauds, phishing, etc.
c. Instances of usurious activities by lending entities in the area, cases of over
indebtedness
d. Credit related frauds by borrower groups, etc.
13. Issues remaining unresolved at DCC/DLRC meeting.
14. Timely submission of data by banks, adhering to the schedule of SLBC meeting.
15. Any other item, with the permission of the Chair.
The above list is illustrative and not exhaustive. SLBC Convenor Banks may include
any other agenda item considered necessary.
2.3.4 SLBC - Yearly Calendar of Meetings
To improve the effectiveness and streamline the functioning of
SLBC/UTLBC meetings, SLBC Convenor Banks have been advised to
prepare a yearly calendar of programmes (calendar year basis) at the
beginning of the year itself, for conducting the meetings. The calendar of
programmes should clearly specify the cut off dates for data submission to
SLBC and acceptance thereof by the SLBC Convenor. This yearly calendar
should be circulated to all the concerned as an advance intimation for
blocking of future dates of senior functionaries of various agencies like
Central Government, State Governments, banks, RBI, etc. The
SLBC/UTLBC meetings should be conducted as per the calendar under all
circumstances. The agenda should also be circulated in advance without
waiting for the data from defaulting banks. The matter should, however, be
taken up with the defaulting banks in the SLBC meeting. In addition, the
SLBC Convenor Bank should write a letter in this regard to the controlling
office of the defaulting banks under advice to the Regional Office of RBI.
The SLBC Convenor Bank will, however, continue to follow-up with banks
for timely data submission. Further, in case the Chief Minister, Finance
Minister or other senior functionaries are not able to attend the SLBC on
some rare occasion, then if so desired by them, a special SLBC meeting
can be held. Following broad guidelines should be used for preparation of
the calendar of programmes:
Activity
To be completed by (Date)
Preparation of calendar of SLBC/UTLBC meetings
and intimation to all the concerned of the cut-off
dates for submission of data and dates of
meetings as per the dateline given below.
15th January every year
Reminder regarding the exact date of meeting and
submission of data by banks to SLBC
15 days before end of the quarter
Dead line for receipt of information/data by SLBC
Convenor Bank
15 days from the end of the quarter
Distribution of agenda cum background papers
20 days from the end of the quarter
Holding of the meeting
Within 45 days from the end of the
quarter
Forwarding the minutes of the meeting to all
stakeholders
Within 10 days from holding the
meeting
Follow-up of the action points emerged from the
meeting
To be completed within 30 days of
forwarding the minutes (for review in
the next meeting)
ii) The objective of preparing the calendar of meetings in the beginning of the year is
to ensure adequate notice of these meetings and timely compilation and dispatch of
agenda papers to all stakeholders. It also ensures clear cut guidelines for the
submission of data to SLBC Convenors by participating banks and Government
Departments. It is expected to save precious time of SLBC Convenors that is otherwise
spent in taking dates from various senior functionaries attending these SLBC
meetings.
iii) SLBC Convenor Banks need to appreciate the advantages of ensuring adherence
to the yearly calendars. SLBC Convenor Banks have therefore been advised to give
wide publicity to the annual calendar at the beginning of the year and ensure that dates
of senior functionaries expected to attend the meetings are blocked for all meetings
by their offices. In case, despite blocking dates, if for some reason, the senior
functionary is not able to attend the meeting, the meeting should be held as planned
in the calendar. More importantly, the data for review in these meetings should be
received as per deadlines set in the calendar and those who do not submit the data in
time should be asked to explain the reasons for delay in sending the data that may be
recorded in the minutes of the meeting. Under no circumstance, should the preparation
of the agenda be delayed beyond the dates stipulated as per the calendar.
2.3.5 SLBC Website – Standardisation of information /data
SLBC Convenor Banks are required to maintain the SLBC websites where all
instructions pertaining to LBS and Government Sponsored Schemes are made
available and are accessible to the common man desiring any information relating to
the conduct of meetings or State-wise data/ bank-wise performance. In order to
standardize the information and data that is to be made available on the SLBC website,
an indicative list is given in the Annex II. SLBCs should arrange to place the prescribed
minimum information on the websites of SLBCs of their bank and keep it updated
regularly, at least on quarterly basis. Banks may note that the list is only indicative and
SLBCs are free to put any additional information considered relevant for the State.
2.3.6 Liaison with State Government
SLBC Convenor Banks are expected to co-ordinate the activities of all banks in the
State, discuss with State Government officials, the operational problems in lending,
extending necessary support for banking development and to achieve the objective of
financial inclusion.
2.3.7 Capacity Building/ Training/ Sensitization Programmes
i) There is a need for sensitising the District Collectors and CEOs of Zilla Parishads
on banks and banking in general as also on the specific scope and role of the LBS. In
each State, a full day ‘Sensitisation Workshop’ may be convened by the SLBC
Convenor Bank every year, preferably in April/ May. Such sensitisation should form
part of the probationary training of such officers. Further, as soon as they are posted
in a district, the SLBC may arrange for exposure visits for the District Collectors to the
SLBC Convenor’s office for sensitisation and understanding of the LBS.
ii) Staff at the operational level of banks and government agencies associated with
implementation of the LBS need to be aware of the latest developments and emerging
opportunities. There is need for staff sensitisation/ training/seminars, etc., at periodic
intervals on an ongoing basis.
3. Implementation of Lead Bank Scheme
3.1 Preparation of credit plans
Planning plays an important role in the implementation of the LBS and a bottom-up
approach is adopted to map the existing potential for development. Under LBS,
planning starts with identifying block-wise/ activity-wise potential estimated for various
sectors.
3.2 Potential Linked Credit Plans
Potential Linked Credit Plans (PLPs) are a step towards decentralized credit
planning with the basic objective of mapping the existing potential for development
through bank credit. PLPs take into account the long-term physical potential,
availability of infrastructure support, marketing facilities and policies/ programmes of
Government etc. NABARD to take measures to ensure that PLPs should be more
focussed and implementable so that banks can utilize them more gainfully while
preparing the Branch Credit Plan (BCP). PLPs should emphasise on promotion of
sustainable agricultural practices suitable to local conditions. While preparing the
PLPs, the focus must be on identifying processes and projects that:
a. reduce carbon foot-print,
b. prevent overuse of fertilizers,
ensure efficient utilisation of water, and
d. address agricultural pollution issues.
The plans must also focus on promoting innovative farming systems, such as, organic
farming, bio dynamic farming, permaculture and sustainable small-scale farming, as
also promoting Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs) and Farmers’ Markets. Such
initiatives must be supported by appropriate investments and project finance
frameworks.
ii) A pre-PLP meeting is convened by the LDM during June every year to be attended
by banks, Government agencies, etc., to reflect their views and concerns regarding
credit potential (sector/activity-wise) and deliberate on major financial and socio-
economic developments in the district in the last one year and priorities to be set out
for inclusion in the PLP. The DDM of NABARD makes a presentation in this meeting
outlining the major requirements of information for preparing the PLP for the following
year. The preparation of PLP for the next year is to be completed by August every
year to enable the State Government to factor in the PLP projections.
iii) The procedure for preparing the District Credit Plan is as follows:
a) Controlling Offices of commercial banks including SFBs, WOS of Foreign
Banks and Head Office of RRBs and DCCB/LDB circulate the accepted block-
wise/activity-wise potential to all their branches for preparing the BCP by their
respective branch managers. Banks should ensure that the exercise of
preparation of branch/block plans is completed in time by all branches so that
the Credit Plans become operational on time.
b) A special BLBC meeting is convened for each block where the BCPs are
discussed and aggregated to form the Block Credit Plan. The DDM and the
LDM guide the BLBC in finalizing the plan, ensuring that the Block Credit Plan
is in tune with the potentials identified activity-wise, including in respect of
Government Sponsored Schemes.
c) All the Block Credit Plans of the district are aggregated by the LDM to form the
District Credit Plan (DCP). This plan indicates an analytical assessment of the
credit needs of the district to be deployed by all the financial institutions
operating in the district and the total quantum of funds to be earmarked as credit
by all the financial institutions for a new financial year. The Zonal/Controlling
Offices of banks, while finalizing their business plans for the year, should take
into account the commitments made in the DCP which should be ready well in
time before the performance budgets are finalized.
d) The DCP is then placed before the DCC by the Lead District Manager for final
acceptance/approval. All the DCPs are eventually aggregated into a State Level
Credit Plan to be prepared by the SLBC Convenor Bank and launched by the
1st of April every year.
e) The corporate business targets for branches, blocks, districts and states may
be aligned with the Annual Credit Plans (ACP) to ensure better implementation.
The Controlling Offices of the banks in each state should synchronize their
internal business plans with the ACP.
3.3 Monitoring the Performance of Credit Plans
The performance of the credit plans is reviewed in the various fora created under the
Lead Bank Scheme as shown below:
At Block Level
Block Level Bankers’ Committee (BLBC)
At District Level
District Consultative Committee (DCC) & District
Level Review Committee (DLRC)
At State Level
State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC)
Monitoring of LBS by RBI - Monitoring Information System (MIS)
i) Data on ACP is an important element to review the flow of credit in the State. ACP
formats are aligned with the extant reporting guidelines on priority sector lending.
Accordingly, the ACP is to be prepared considering the categories of priority sector
that would include Agriculture, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, Export Credit,
Education, Housing, Social Infrastructure, Renewable Energy and Others. The
definition of MSMEs will be as per Government of India (GoI), Gazette Notification
S.O. 2119 (E) dated June 26, 2020 read with circular RBI/2020-2021/10 FIDD.MSME
andNFS.BC.No.3/06.02.31/2020-21 read
with FIDD.MSME
and
NFS.
BC.
No.4/06.02.31/2020-21 dated July 2, 2020, August 21, 2020 respectively on ‘Credit
flow to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Sector’ and updated from time to time.
With a view to simplify the MIS Statements, it had been decided that the quarterly
statement on progress under ACP may be prepared in an all-inclusive single format -
MIS (Annex IV) containing data on (a) ACP targets (b) ACP achievements/
disbursements and (c) ACP sector/ sub-sector wise loan amount outstanding, for all
categories of LBS fora member banks viz. PSBs, PvSBs, RRBs, SFBs and Rural
Cooperative Banks (StCBs and DCCBs). The bank group wise statements as per the
prescribed format should be prepared and the same to be placed for meaningful review
in all DCC and SLBC meetings.
ii) In order to maintain consistency and integrity of data with the All-India data of SCBs
and facilitate a meaningful review/analysis of data, the ACP data needs to be grouped
separately for SCBs and other banks like State Cooperative Banks (StCBs), DCCBs,
etc. while presenting in the DCC/SLBC meetings and submitting to our Regional
Offices. The data pertaining to SCBs needs to be further grouped into public sector
banks, private sector banks, RRBs, and WOS of Foreign Banks to know the bank
group wise position.
3.4 Revised mechanism of Data Flow for LBS fora meetings
At present, discussions at the quarterly meetings of the various LBS fora viz. State
Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC), District level Consultative Committee (DCC) and
Block Level Bankers’ Committee (BLBC) primarily focus on the performance of banks
in the disbursement of loans vis-a-vis the allocated target under the Annual Credit
Plan. The integrity & timeliness of the data submitted by banks for the purpose has
been an issue as a significant portion of this data is manually compiled and entered
into the Data Management Systems of the SLBC Convenor Banks. The extent to which
this data corresponds with the data present in the Core Banking Solution (CBS) of the
respective banks also varies significantly. Therefore, there is need of a standardized
system to be developed on the website maintained by each SLBC to enable uploading
and downloading of the data pertaining to the Block, District as well as the State. The
relevant data must also be directly downloadable from the CBS and/ or MIS of the
banks with a view to keeping manual intervention to a minimal level in the process.
The procedure relating to the envisaged intervention in this area is given below:
Management of Data Flow at LBS Fora – Procedure
Each bank’s CBS should have a provision to generate a report pertaining to all LBS
related data/ tables to Excel. This data should have information pertaining to all the
branches operating in the state including fields/ columns for District and Block
name. Access to Download & Export this data from the bank’s CBS should be given
to the Controlling Offices of the banks who would be solely responsible for the
process of ‘Data Feeding’ for all districts/ blocks within their jurisdiction.
ii.
The ‘Data Feeding’ process is the process of uploading this Excel file (downloaded
in step (i) above) on the SLBC websites. SLBC websites should have a provision
to ‘Import/ Upload’ all the data present in the Excel Sheet on the database of the
SLBC website. This would obviate any manual ‘data entry’ at the SLBC/ Controlling
Office level.
iii.
To facilitate the above functionality, each SLBC Convenor Bank would have to add
this ‘Import/ Upload’ functionality to their SLBC website along with the requisite
capabilities at the back-end.
iv.
The SLBC website would, thus, effectively work as a data aggregation platform.
Further, data analysis capabilities could also be added to the SLBC websites
depending on the available resources.
The SLBC websites should provide access to LDMs to download district and block
specific data directly from this website thus ensuring integrity and timely availability
of data.
vi.
There could still be some data pertaining to State Government Schemes/ other
data that is not available on the CBS or MIS of the banks. This would have to be
collated at the Controlling Office level as is done now. At the SLBC website,
functionalities could be provided to enter this data too. This could then be
downloaded by the LDMs for district/ block level reports. Banks may also add Open
Format fields like ‘text boxes’ for data or information that is special or is entered/
used once in a while.
vii.
Such a system ensures that LDMs & SLBC Convenor Banks have to do zero or
minimal data entry/ feeding and all data is entered by a single ‘custodian of data’
which is the Controlling Office of each bank. Any information to be provided by
Government extension agencies could also be similarly uploaded.
Necessary modifications may be made on the SLBC websites and to the CBS & MIS
systems of all banks to implement the envisaged data flow mechanism.
A Working Group of select SLBC Convenor banks and NABARD was constituted by
RBI to work out a standardised system for collection, storage, presentation and
management of data on the SLBC/ UTLBC website. A Standard Operating Procedure
(SOP), which may be followed by SLBC/ UTLBC Convenor Banks, member banks and
LDMs, as suggested by the Working Group for management of the data flow is given
at Annex III.
4. Assignment of Lead Bank Responsibility
i) Lead Bank Scheme is administered by the Reserve Bank of India since 1969. The
assignment of Lead Bank responsibility to designated banks in every district is done
by the Reserve Bank of India following a detailed procedure formulated for this
purpose. As on March 31, 2025, 12 public sector banks and two private sector banks
(Jammu & Kashmir Bank and ICICI Bank) have been assigned Lead Bank
responsibility in 782 districts of the country.
ii) State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC)/Union Territory Level Bankers' Committee
(UTLBC), as an apex level forum at the State/Union Territory (UT) level, coordinates
the activities of the financial institutions and Government departments in the
State/Union Territory under the Lead Bank Scheme. SLBC/UTLBC Convenorship is
assigned to banks for this purpose. As on March 31, 2025, the SLBC/ UTLBC
convenorship of 28 States and 8 Union Territories has been assigned to 11 public
sector banks and one private sector bank. A list of State/UT wise SLBC/UTLBC
Convenor Banks and district wise Lead Banks is given in Annex I.
iii) The Lead Bank Scheme (LBS) has been extended to the districts in the metropolitan
areas, thus bringing the entire country under the fold of the Lead Bank Scheme.
5. Banking Penetration
i) Over the years, the focus of the Lead Bank Scheme has shifted to inclusive growth
and financial inclusion. The use of Information Technology (IT) and intermediaries has
enabled banks to increase the outreach, scale and depth of banking services at
affordable cost.
ii) SLBC Convenor Banks/ Lead Banks are advised to focus attention on the need for
achieving 100% financial inclusion through penetration of banking services in the rural
areas. Revised guidelines on ‘Rationalisation of Branch Authorisation Policy’ issued
by the Department of Regulation (DoR), RBI on May 18, 2017 advised banks to
consider opening of a CBS-enabled banking outlet or a part time banking outlet, as
the case may be, in unbanked rural centres.
iii) SLBC Convenor Banks should take up with the State Governments/ other
Government departments concerned, impeders, such as, issues of road/digital
connectivity, conducive law and order situation, uninterrupted power supply, adequate
security, etc., for ensuring banking expansion at all centres where penetration by the
formal banking system is required. However, these impeders should not inhibit the
scaling up of financial inclusion initiatives.
5.1 Roadmap for providing banking services in unbanked villages
In November 2009, a roadmap to provide banking services in villages with population
more than 2000 was rolled out. All the identified villages have been provided with
banking services through branches, BCs or through other modes, such as, ATMs and
mobile vans. Later, in June 2012, a roadmap to provide banking services in unbanked
villages with less than 2000 population was rolled out. SLBC Convenor Banks and
Lead Banks were advised to complete the process of providing banking services in
unbanked
villages
with
population
below
August
14,
2015.
5.2 Roadmap for opening brick and mortar branches in villages with population
more than 5000 without a bank branch of a scheduled commercial bank
As brick and mortar branches are an integral component of financial inclusion, it was
decided to focus on villages with population above 5000 without a bank branch of a
SCB. This was to enable banks to provide quality financial services and timely support
to BC outlets that would help in sustaining and strengthening the services provided
through BCs and for ensuring close supervision of BC operations. Accordingly, SLBC
Convenor Banks were advised to identify villages with population above 5000 without
a branch of a SCB in their State and allot these villages among SCBs (including RRBs)
for opening of branches.
5.3 Aligning roadmap for unbanked villages having population more than 5000
with revised Guidelines on Branch Authorisation Policy
In terms of the DoR circular dated May 18, 2017 on ‘Rationalisation of Branch
Authorisation Policy - Revision of Guidelines’, final guidelines on ‘Banking Outlets’
have been issued to facilitate financial inclusion as also to provide flexibility to banks
on the choice of delivery channel. Accordingly, SLBC Convenor Banks have been
advised to identify all unbanked rural centres (URCs) in the State, compile and
maintain an updated list of all such centres. The updated list should be displayed on
the website of each SLBC to facilitate banks to choose/indicate the place/centre where
they wish to open a ‘banking outlet’.
ii) Further, SLBC Convenor Banks have been advised that in order to comply with the
criteria of opening at least 25 percent of total banking outlets in unbanked rural centres
in Tier 5 and 6 centres, as prescribed vide DoR circular dated May 18, 2017, banks
should give priority to villages without a banking outlet having population more than
5000 (i.e., Tier 5 centres) and ensure that all such villages under their jurisdiction are
covered with a CBS-enabled Banking Outlet on priority basis.
iii) The updated list of URCs should be tabled in all SLBC meetings during discussions
on the progress of providing banking services in unbanked rural centres.
5.4 National Strategy for Financial Inclusion (NSFI): 2019-2024 – Universal
Access to Financial Services
Providing banking access to every village within a 5 KM radius/ hamlet of 500
households in hilly areas has been one of the key objectives of the National Strategy
for Financial Inclusion (NSFI): 2019-2024. Accordingly, SLBC/ UTLBC Convenor
Banks have been advised to review the presence of banking outlets of SCBs, RRBs,
Small Finance Banks (SFBs) and PBs in every village within a 5 KM radius/ hamlet of
500 households in hilly areas under their jurisdiction(s) and ensure that universal
access to financial services is provided to all such villages.
6. Credit Deposit Ratio (CD Ratio)
6.1 CD Ratio of Banks in Rural and Semi-Urban Areas
Banks have been advised to achieve a CD Ratio of 60 percent in respect of their rural
and semi-urban branches separately on an All-India basis. While it is not necessary
that this ratio should be achieved separately, branch-wise, district-wise or region-wise,
banks should, nevertheless, ensure that wide disparity in the ratios between different
States/ Regions is avoided to minimise regional imbalance in credit deployment. The
credit dispensation in certain districts is very low, due to various factors, such as, lack
of necessary infrastructure, varying ability of different regions to absorb credit, etc.
Banks may review the performance of their branches in such areas and take
necessary steps to augment credit flow. The Lead Banks may discuss the problem in
all its aspects with other financial institutions in the district and also in the DCC forum.
6.2 Implementation of the Recommendations of the Expert Group on CD Ratio
i) An Expert Group was constituted by the Government of India to go into the nature
and magnitude of the problem of low CD Ratio across States/ Regions and to suggest
steps to overcome the problem. The Expert Group examined the problems and causes
of low CD Ratio and made recommendations. As per the recommendations, the CD
Ratio of banks should be monitored at different levels based on the following
parameters:
Institution / Level
Indicator
Individual Banks at Head Office
Cu + RIDF
State Level (SLBC)
Cu + RIDF
District Level
Cs#
Where:
Cu = Credit as per place of Utilization
Cs# = Credit as per place of Sanction
RIDF = Total Resource support provided to States under RIDF
# In case of credit proposals received at district level but not sanctionable thereat due
to limitations of the sanctioning power and sanctioned at bank’s Head office/
controlling offices and the loan utilised / disbursed in districts through branches, are
treated as loan sanctioned and utilised at district level. Hence, it may be considered
at district level for computing CD ratio.
As regards calculation of CD ratio based on limit sanctioned/ amount outstanding, it is
clarified that the CD ratio may be calculated on the basis of amount outstanding.
Further, banks are advised that:
In districts having CD Ratio less than 40 percent, Special Sub-Committees (SSCs) of
the DCC shall be set up to monitor the CD Ratio.
• Districts having CD Ratio between 40 and 60 percent shall be monitored under
the existing system by the DCC, and
• The districts with CD Ratio less than 20 percent need to be treated on a special
footing.
ii) SSCs of the DCC should be set up in the districts having CD Ratio less than 40
percent, to monitor the CD Ratio and to draw up Monitorable Action Plans (MAPs) to
increase the CD Ratio. The LDM is designated as the Convenor of the SSC which, in
addition to the District Co-ordinators of banks functioning in the area, should comprise
of the LDO of RBI, the DDM of NABARD, the District Planning Officer or a
representative of the Collector duly empowered to take decisions on behalf of the
district administration.
The functions of the SSC are as under:
• The SSCs should draw up MAPs for improving the CD Ratio in their districts on
a self-set graduated basis.
• For this purpose, the SSC should hold a special meeting immediately after its
constitution and based on various ground level parameters, set for itself, a
target for increasing the CD Ratio, initially for the current year. It will also, at the
same meeting, set a definite time frame to achieve CD Ratio more than 60
percent in annual increments.
• Consequent to the completion of this process, the target and time frame self-
set by the SSC should be placed before the DCC for approval.
• The plans for implementation must then be taken up by the SSC and monitored
assiduously, once in two months.
• The SSC should report the progress on the implementation of the plan to the
DCC on a quarterly basis and through them to the SLBC Convenor.
• Based on the feedback received from the DCC regarding the progress in
implementation of the MAPs, a consolidated report should be prepared by the
SSC and tabled at all SLBC meetings for discussion/ information.
iii) As regards the districts with CD Ratio less than 20 percent, these are generally
located in hilly, desert or inaccessible terrains and/ or those dependent solely on the
primary sector and/ or characterized by a breakdown of the law and order machinery.
In such areas, conventional methods are not likely to work unless the banking system
and the State Government come together in a specially meaningful way.
iv) While the framework for implementation for raising the CD Ratio in these districts
will be the same as in the case of districts with CD Ratio below 40 percent (i.e., setting
up of SSC etc.), the focus of attention and the level of efforts should be of a much
higher scale.
For this,
• All such districts should first be placed in a special category.
• Thereafter, the responsibility for increasing their CD Ratio should be taken by
banks and State Governments and the districts should be "adopted" by the
District Administration and the Lead Bank jointly.
• While banks would be responsible for credit disbursement, the State
Government would be required to give an upfront commitment regarding its
responsibilities for creation of identified rural infrastructure together with support
in creating an enabling environment for banks to lend and to recover their dues.
• Progress in the special category districts should be monitored at the district
level and reported to the corporate offices of the concerned banks.
• The Chairmen/ Managing Directors of banks should give special attention to
the CD Ratio in such districts.
7. Direct Benefit Transfer
DBT was rolled out by the Government of India in selected districts in January 2013.
It was expanded to other districts subsequently. SLBC Convenor Banks were advised
to co-ordinate with the Government authorities to implement DBT. Banks were advised
to include the status of the roll-out of DBT as a regular agenda item for discussion in
SLBC meetings as part of Financial Inclusion/ DBT implementation. As a prerequisite
to the implementation of DBT, every eligible individual should have a bank account.
Further, to make disbursements at the doorstep through the ICT-based BC model,
banking outlets either through brick & mortar branches or the branchless mode is
needed in all villages across the country. Hence, banks have been advised to:
• take steps to complete the opening of bank accounts and seeding of Aadhaar
numbers in all bank accounts.
• closely monitor the progress in seeding of Aadhaar number with the bank
accounts of beneficiaries.
• put in place a system to provide the beneficiary of the seeding request an
acknowledgement and send a confirmation of the seeding of Aadhaar number.
• form a DBT Implementation Co-ordination Committee, along with the State
Government department concerned at district level and review the seeding of
Aadhaar numbers in bank accounts.
• ensure that district and village wise names and other details of BCs engaged/
other arrangements made by the bank are displayed on the SLBC website.
• set up a Complaint Grievance Redressal mechanism in each bank and
nominate a Complaint Redressal Officer in each district, to redress the
grievances related to ‘seeding of Aadhaar number in bank accounts'.
Banks were further advised to ensure that opening of bank accounts and seeding of
Aadhaar numbers with existing or new accounts of eligible beneficiaries opened for
the purpose of DBT under social welfare schemes, was in conformity with the
provisions listed under Section 16 of the Master Direction - Know Your Customer
(KYC) Direction, 2016 (updated as on May 10, 2021) and extant provisions of the
Prevention of Money Laundering (PML) Rules.
8. Service Area Approach (SAA)
i) The Service Area Approach (SAA) introduced in April 1989 for planned and orderly
development of rural and semi-urban areas was applicable to all SCBs including
RRBs. Under SAA, each bank branch in a rural or semi-urban area was designated to
serve an area of 15 to 25 villages and the branch was responsible for meeting the
needs of bank credit of its service area. The primary objective of SAA was to increase
productive lending and forge effective linkages between bank credit, production,
productivity and increase in income levels.
ii) The SAA scheme was reviewed in December 2004 and it was decided to dispense
with the restrictive provisions of the scheme, while retaining the positive features of
the SAA, such as, credit planning and monitoring of the credit purveyance.
Accordingly, under SAA, the allocation of villages among the rural and semi-urban
branches of banks were made not applicable for lending except under Government
Sponsored Schemes. Thus, while the commercial banks and RRBs are free to lend in
any rural and semi-urban area, the borrowers have the choice of approaching any
branch for their credit requirements.
8.1 Dispensing with ‘No Due Certificate’
In order to ensure hassle free credit to all borrowers, especially in rural and semi-urban
areas and keeping in view the technological developments and the different ways
available with banks to avoid multiple financing, banks have been advised to dispense
with obtaining a ‘No Due Certificate’ from individual borrowers (including SHGs and
JLGs) in rural and semi-urban areas for all types of loans, including loans under
Government Sponsored Schemes, irrespective of the amount involved unless the
Government Sponsored Scheme itself provides for obtention of a ‘No Due Certificate’.
Further, it has been clarified that the policy of dispensing with a ‘No Due Certificate’
for lending by banks is also applicable to urban areas including metropolitan cities.
ii) Banks are encouraged to use an alternative framework of due diligence as part of
the credit appraisal exercise other than the ‘No Due Certificate’ which could, among
others, consist of one or more of the following:
• Credit history check through Credit Information Companies (CICs)
• Self-declaration or an affidavit from the borrower
• CERSAI registration
• Peer monitoring
• Information sharing among lenders
• Information search (writing to other lenders with an auto deadline)
iii)
Banks are also advised to submit information/data to all CICs, as required in
terms of extant instructions issued by RBI.
9. Enhancing Farmers’ Income
i) The Government of India, in the Union Budget 2016-17, had announced its resolve
to double the income of farmers by 2022. Several steps were taken towards attaining
this objective, including setting up of an inter-ministerial committee for preparation of
a blue print for the same. This agenda was reiterated by the government in several
fora and acquired primacy from the point of view of rural and agricultural development.
ii) The strategy to achieve this goal, inter-alia, includes,
Focus on irrigation with large budgets, with the aim of "per drop, more crop".
Provision of quality seeds and nutrients based on soil health of each field.
Investments in warehousing and cold chains to prevent post-harvest crop
losses.
Promotion of value addition through food processing.
Creation of a national farm market, removing distortions and development of
infrastructure such as e-platform across 585 stations.
Strengthening of the crop insurance scheme to mitigate risks at affordable
cost.
Promotion of ancillary activities like poultry, bee-keeping and fisheries.
• Diversification towards high value crops needs to be promoted at district level,
accordingly value chain needs to be developed for those high value crops.
• Creation of a Start-up Ecosystem in agriculture and allied sector.
• Promotion of organic farming in the country.
iii. Needless to emphasize that acceleration in income generation is significantly
dependent on better capital formation in agriculture. Towards this, banks should revisit
their documentation for crop loans, simplify them where required and ensure speedy
sanctioning and disbursal of loans within specified time limits.
iv. The Lead Bank Scheme, which ensures inter-departmental/ governmental
coordination in the financial sector, should, therefore, be leveraged to further the
objective of enhancing farmers’ Income. Lead Banks are accordingly advised to
ensure the following:
a. Work closely with NABARD in the preparation of Potential Linked Credit Plans
(PLPs) & Annual Credit Plans (ACPs) keeping the above strategy in
consideration
b. Include ‘Enhancing Farmers’ Income as a regular agenda under the LBS in
various fora such as SLBC, DCC, DLRC and BLBC
c. For monitoring and reviewing the progress, Lead Banks may use benchmarks
as may be provided by NABARD
d. Map the overall strategy as given in para 9 (ii) above to the agriculture/ agro-
ancillary lending plan of the bank.
10. Expanding and Deepening of Digital Payments Ecosystem
With a view to expanding and deepening the digital payments ecosystem, the SLBCs/
UTLBCs were advised to identify one district in their respective States/ UTs on a pilot
basis, in consultation with banks and stakeholders and allocate it to a bank with
significant footprint, which would endeavour to make the district 100% digitally
enabled. With this, every individual in the district would be able to make/ receive
payments digitally in a safe, secure, quick, affordable and convenient manner. SLBC/
UTLBC Convenor Banks were also advised to devise a time bound roadmap for all
branches of member banks (Public Sector Banks, Private Sector Banks, RRBs, SFBs
and PBs) located in the identified district(s) for on-boarding merchants/ traders/
businesses/ utility service providers to facilitate fully digital transactions. Further,
SLBC/ UTLBC Convenor Banks were advised to constitute a Sub-Committee on
Digital Payments at the SLBC/ UTLBC level. Subsequently, SLBCs/ UTLBCs have
been advised to devise a timebound roadmap to cover all the districts in their
respective States/UTs and make them 100% digitally enabled.
Annex I
List of State/ UT-wise SLBC/ UTLBC Convenor Banks and district-wise Lead Banks
Sr.
No.
State / Union
Territory
SLBC/UTLBC
Convenor bank
District
District Lead Bank
Andhra
Pradesh
Union Bank of India
1. Alluri Sitharama
Raju
Union Bank of India
2. Anakapalli
Union Bank of India
3. Ananthapuramu
(earlier name –
Anantapur)
Canara Bank
4. Annamayya
State Bank of India
5. Bapatla
Union Bank of India
6. Chittoor
Indian Bank
7. Dr. B R
Ambedkar
Konaseema
(earlier name –
Konaseema)
Union Bank of India
8. East Godavari
Union Bank of India
9. Eluru
Union Bank of India
10. Guntur
Union Bank of India
11. Kakinada
Union Bank of India
12. Krishna
Indian Bank
13. Kurnool
Canara Bank
14. Nandyal
Union Bank of India
15. NTR
Union Bank of India
16. Palnadu
Union Bank of India
17. Parvathipuram
Manyam
State Bank of India
18. Prakasam
Canara Bank
19. Sri Potti
Sriramulu
Nellore (Earlier
name – Nellore)
Canara Bank
20. Sri Sathya Sai
Canara Bank
21. Srikakulam
Union Bank of India
22. Tirupati
Union Bank of India
23. Visakhapatnam
State Bank of India
24. Vizianagaram
State Bank of India
25. West Godavari
Union Bank of India
26. Y.S.R (Earlier
Name –
Kadapa)
Canara Bank
Arunachal
Pradesh
State Bank of India
1. Anjaw
State Bank of India
2. Changlang
State Bank of India
3. Dibang Valley
State Bank of India
4. East Kameng
State Bank of India
5. East Siang
State Bank of India
6. Kamle
State Bank of India
7. Kra Daadi
State Bank of India
8. Kurung Kumey
State Bank of India
9. Leparada
State Bank of India
10. Lohit
State Bank of India
11. Longding
State Bank of India
12. Lower Dibang
Valley
State Bank of India
13. Lower Siang
State Bank of India
14. Lower Subansiri  State Bank of India
15. Namsai
State Bank of India
16. Pakke Kessang
State Bank of India
17. Papum Pare
State Bank of India
18. Shi-Yomi
State Bank of India
19. Siang
State Bank of India
20. Tawang
State Bank of India
21. Tirap
State Bank of India
22. Upper Siang
State Bank of India
23. Upper Subansiri  State Bank of India
24. West Kameng
State Bank of India
25. West Siang
State Bank of India
Assam
State Bank of India
1. Baksa
State Bank of India
2. Barpeta
UCO Bank
3. Biswanath
Indian Bank
4. Bongaigaon
State Bank of India
5. Cachar
Punjab National Bank
6. Charaideo
Punjab National Bank
7. Chirang
State Bank of India
8. Darrang
UCO Bank
9. Dhemaji
Punjab National Bank
10. Dhubri
UCO Bank
11. Dibrugarh
Punjab National Bank
12. Goalpara
UCO Bank
13. Golaghat
Punjab National Bank
14. Hailakandi
Punjab National Bank
15. Hojai
State Bank of India
16. Jorhat
Punjab National Bank
17. Kamrup
UCO Bank
18. Kamrup Metro
UCO Bank
19. Karbi Anglong
State Bank of India
20. Kokrajhar
UCO Bank
21. Lakhimpur
Punjab National Bank
22. Majuli
Punjab National Bank
23. Morigaon
Punjab National Bank
24. Nagaon
Punjab National Bank
25. Nalbari
UCO Bank
26. North Cachar
Hills
State Bank of India
27. Sivasagar
Punjab National Bank
28. Sonitpur
UCO Bank
29. South Salmara-
Mankachar
UCO Bank
30. Sribhumi (earlier
name – Karimganj)
Punjab National Bank
31. Tamulpur
State Bank of India
32. Tinsukia
Punjab National Bank
33. Udalguri
State Bank of India
34. West Karbi
Anglong
State Bank of India
Bihar
State Bank of India
1. Araria
State Bank of India
2. Arwal
Punjab National Bank
3. Aurangabad
Punjab National Bank
4. Banka
UCO Bank
5. Begusarai
UCO Bank
6. Bhabua (Kaimur)
Punjab National Bank
7. Bhagalpur
UCO Bank
8. Bhojpur (Arrah)
Punjab National Bank
9. Buxar
Punjab National Bank
10. Darbhanga
Central Bank of India
11. East
Champaran
Central Bank of India
12. Gaya
Punjab National Bank
13. Gopalgunj
Central Bank of India
14. Jamui
State Bank of India
15. Jehanabad
Punjab National Bank
16. Katihar
Central Bank of India
17. Khagaria
Union Bank of India
18. Kishanganj
State Bank of India
19. Lakhisarai
Punjab National Bank
20. Madhepura
State Bank of India
21. Madhubani
Central Bank of India
22. Monghyr
UCO Bank
23. Muzaffarpur
Central Bank of India
24. Nalanda
Punjab National Bank
25. Nawada
Punjab National Bank
26. Patna
Punjab National Bank
27. Purnea
State Bank of India
28. Rohtas
(Sasaram)
Punjab National Bank
29. Saharsa
State Bank of India
30. Samastipur
Union Bank of India
31. Saran
Central Bank of India
32. Sheikhpura
Canara Bank
33. Sheohar
Bank of Baroda
34. Sitamarhi
Bank of Baroda
35. Siwan
Central Bank of India
36. Supaul
State Bank of India
37. Vaishali
Central Bank of India
38. West
Champaran
Central Bank of India
Chhattisgarh
State Bank of India
1. Balod
Bank of Baroda
2. Baloda Bazar
State Bank of India
3. Balrampur
Central Bank of India
4. Bastar
State Bank of India
5. Bemetara
State Bank of India
6. Bijapur
State Bank of India
7. Bilaspur
State Bank of India
8. Dantewada
State Bank of India
9. Dhamtari
Bank of Baroda
10. Durg
Bank of Baroda
11. Gariaband
Bank of Baroda
12. Gaurela-Pendra-
Marwahi
State Bank of India
13. Janjgir Champa
State Bank of India
14. Jashpur
State Bank of India
15. Kabirdham
State Bank of India
16. Kanker
State Bank of India
17. Khairagarh-
Chhuikhadan-
Gandai
State Bank of India
18. Kondagaon
State Bank of India
19. Korba
State Bank of India
20. Korea
Central Bank of India
21. Mahasamund
Bank of Baroda
22. Manendragarh-
Chirmiri-Bharatpur
(MCB)
Central Bank of India
23. Mohla-Manpur-
Ambagarh Chouki
Bank of Baroda
24. Mungeli
State Bank of India
25. Narayanpur
State Bank of India
26. Raigarh
State Bank of India
27. Raipur
Bank of Baroda
28. Rajnandgaon
Bank of Baroda
29. Sakti
State Bank of India
30. Sarangarh-
Bilaigarh
State Bank of India
31. Sukma
State Bank of India
32. Surajpur
Central Bank of India
33. Surguja
Central Bank of India
Goa
State Bank of India
1. North Goa
State Bank of India
2. South Goa
State Bank of India
Gujarat
Bank of Baroda
1. Ahmedabad
State Bank of India
2. Amreli
State Bank of India
3. Anand
Bank of Baroda
4. Aravalli
Bank of Baroda
5. Banaskantha
Bank of Baroda
6. Bharuch
Bank of Baroda
7. Bhavnagar
State Bank of India
8. Botad
Bank of Baroda
9. Chhota Udaipur
Bank of Baroda
10. Dahod
Bank of Baroda
11. Dangs
Bank of Baroda
12. Devbhumi
Dwarka
Bank of Baroda
13. Gandhinagar
State Bank of India
14. Gir Somnath
State Bank of India
15.  Godhra
(PanchMahal)
Bank of Baroda
16.  Jamnagar
State Bank of India
17.  Junagadh
State Bank of India
18.  Kheda
Bank of Baroda
19.  Kutch (Bhuj)
Bank of Baroda
20.  Mahisagar
Bank of Baroda
21.  Mehsana
Bank of Baroda
22.  Morbi
State Bank of India
23.  Narmada
Bank of Baroda
24.  Navsari
Bank of Baroda
25.  Patan
Bank of Baroda
26.  Porbandar
State Bank of India
27.  Rajkot
State Bank of India
28.  Sabarkantha
Bank of Baroda
29.  Surat
Bank of Baroda
30.  Surendranagar
State Bank of India
31.  Tapi
Bank of Baroda
32.  Vadodara
Bank of Baroda
33.  Valsad
Bank of Baroda
Haryana
Punjab National
Bank
1. Ambala
Punjab National Bank
2. Bhiwani
Punjab National Bank
3. Charki Dadri
Punjab National Bank
4. Faridabad
Canara Bank
5. Fatehabad
Punjab National Bank
6. Gurgaon
Canara Bank
7. Hisar
Punjab National Bank
8. Jhajjar
Punjab National Bank
9. Jind
Punjab National Bank
10. Kaithal
Punjab National Bank
11. Karnal
Punjab National Bank
12. Kurukshetra
Punjab National Bank
13. Mahendragarh
Punjab National Bank
14. Nuh
Canara Bank
15.  Palwal
Punjab National Bank
16.  Panchkula
Punjab National Bank
17.  Panipat
Punjab National Bank
18.  Rewari
Punjab National Bank
19.  Rohtak
Punjab National Bank
20.  Sirsa
Punjab National Bank
21.  Sonepat
Punjab National Bank
22.  Yamunanagar
Punjab National Bank
Himachal
Pradesh
UCO Bank
1. Bilaspur
UCO Bank
2. Chamba
State Bank of India
3. Hamirpur
Punjab National Bank
4. Kangra
(Dharamshala)
Punjab National Bank
5. Kinnaur (Peo)
Punjab National Bank
6. Kullu
Punjab National Bank
7. Lahaul & Spiti
(Kelyong)
State Bank of India
8. Mandi
Punjab National Bank
9. Shimla
UCO Bank
10. Sirmaur
UCO Bank
11. Solan
UCO Bank
12. Una
Punjab National Bank
Jharkhand
Bank of India
1. Bokaro
Bank of India
2. Chatra
Bank of India
3. Deoghar
State Bank of India
4. Dhanbad
Bank of India
5. Dumka
Indian Bank
6. East Singhbhum
Bank of India
7. Garhwa
State Bank of India
8. Giridih
Bank of India
9. Godda
Indian Bank
10. Gumla
Bank of India
11. Hazaribag
Bank of India
12. Jamtara
State Bank of India
13. Khunti
Bank of India
14. Koderma
Bank of India
15.  Letehar
State Bank of India
16.  Lohardaga
Bank of India
17.  Pakur
State Bank of India
18.  Palamu
State Bank of India
19.  Ramgarh
Bank of India
20.  Ranchi
Bank of India
21.  Sahibganj
State Bank of India
22.  Seraikela-
Kharsawan
Bank of India
23.  Simdega
Bank of India
24.  West
Singhbhum
Bank of India
Karnataka
Canara Bank
1. Bagalkote
Canara Bank
2. Ballari
Canara Bank
3. Belagavi
Canara Bank
4. Bengaluru Rural
Canara Bank
5. Bengaluru Urban
Canara Bank
6. Bidar
State Bank of India
7. Chamarajanagar
State Bank of India
8. Chikkaballapur
Canara Bank
9. Chikkamagaluru
Union Bank of India
10. Chitradurga
Canara Bank
11. Dakshina
Kannada
Canara Bank
12. Davangere
Canara Bank
13. Dharwad
Bank of Baroda
14.  Gadag
State Bank of India
15.  Hassan
Canara Bank
16.  Haveri
Bank of Baroda
17.  Kalaburagi
State Bank of India
18.  Kodagu
Union Bank of India
19.  Kolar
Canara Bank
20.  Koppal
State Bank of India
21.  Mandya
Bank of Baroda
22.  Mysuru
State Bank of India
23.  Raichur
State Bank of India
24.  Ramanagara
Union Bank of India
25.  Shivamogga
Canara Bank
26.  Tumakuru
State Bank of India
27.  Udupi
Canara Bank
28.  Uttar Kannada
Canara Bank
29.  Vijayanagara
State Bank of India
30.  Vijayapura
Canara Bank
31.  Yadgir
State Bank of India
Kerala
Canara Bank
1. Alappuzha
State Bank of India
2. Ernakulam
State Bank of India
3. Idukki
State Bank of India
4. Kannur
Canara Bank
5. Kasaragod
Canara Bank
6. Kollam
Indian Bank
7. Kottayam
State Bank of India
8. Kozhikode
Canara Bank
9. Malappuram
Canara Bank
10. Palakkad
Canara Bank
11. Pathanamthitta
State Bank of India
12.
Thiruvananthapuram
Indian Overseas Bank
13. Thrissur
Canara Bank
14. Wayanad
(Kalepetta)
Canara Bank
Madhya
Pradesh
Central Bank of
India
1. Agar-Malwa
Bank of India
2. Alirajpur
Bank of Baroda
3. Anuppur
Central Bank of India
4. Ashoknagar
State Bank of India
5. Balaghat
Central Bank of India
6. Barwani
Bank of India
7. Betul
Central Bank of India
8. Bhind
Central Bank of India
9. Bhopal
Bank of India
10. Burhanpur
Bank of India
11. Chhatarpur
State Bank of India
12. Chhindwara
Central Bank of India
13. Damoh
State Bank of India
14. Datia
Punjab National Bank
15. Dewas
Bank of India
16. Dhar
Bank of India
17.  Dindori
Central Bank of India
18. East Nimar
(Khandwa)
Bank of India
19.  Guna
State Bank of India
20.  Gwalior
Central Bank of India
21.  Harda
State Bank of India
22.  Hoshangabad
Central Bank of India
23.  Indore
Bank of India
24.  Jabalpur
Central Bank of India
25.  Jhabua
Bank of Baroda
26.  Katni
State Bank of India
27.  Maihar
Indian Bank
28.  Mandla
Central Bank of India
29.  Mandsaur
Central Bank of India
30.  Mauganj
Union Bank of India
31.  Morena
Central Bank of India
32.  Narsinghpur
Central Bank of India
33.  Neemuch
State Bank of India
34.  Niwari
State Bank of India
35.  Pandhurna
Central Bank of India
36.  Panna
State Bank of India
37.  Raisen
Central Bank of India
38.  Rajgarh
Bank of India
39.  Ratlam
Central Bank of India
40.  Rewa
Union Bank of India
41.  Sagar
Central Bank of India
42.  Satna
Indian Bank
43.  Seoni
State Bank of India
44.  Shahdol
Central Bank of India
45.  Shajapur
Bank of India
46.  Sheopur Kala
State Bank of India
47.  Shivpuri
State Bank of India
48.  Sidhi
Union Bank of India
49.  Sihore
Bank of India
50.  Singrauli
Union Bank of India
51.  Tikamgarh
State Bank of India
52.  Ujjain
Bank of India
53.  Umaria
State Bank of India
54.  Vidisha
State Bank of India
55.  West Nimar
(Khargone)
Bank of India
Maharashtra
Bank of
Maharashtra
1. Ahmednagar
Central Bank of India
2. Akola
Central Bank of India
3. Amravati
Central Bank of India
4. Beed
State Bank of India
5. Bhandara
Bank of India
6. Buldhana
Central Bank of India
7. Chandrapur
Bank of India
8. Chhatrapati
Sambhajinagar
Bank of Maharashtra
9. Dharashiv
State Bank of India
10. Dhule
Central Bank of India
11. Gadchiroli
Bank of India
12. Gondia
Bank of India
13. Hingoli
State Bank of India
14. Jalgaon
Central Bank of India
15. Jalna
Bank of Maharashtra
16. Kolhapur
Bank of India
17. Latur
State Bank of India
18. Mumbai City
Bank of Baroda
19. Mumbai
Suburban
Bank of Baroda
20. Nagpur
Bank of India
21. Nanded
State Bank of India
22. Nandurbar
State Bank of India
23. Nashik
Bank of Maharashtra
24.  Palghar
Bank of Maharashtra
25. Parbhani
State Bank of India
26. Pune
Bank of Maharashtra
27. Raigad
Bank of India
28. Ratnagiri
Bank of India
29. Sangli
Bank of India
30. Satara
Bank of Maharashtra
31. Sindhudurg
Bank of India
32.  Solapur
Bank of India
33.  Thane
Bank of Maharashtra
34. Wardha
Bank of India
35. Washim
State Bank of India
36. Yavatmal
Central Bank of India
Manipur
State Bank of India
1. Bishnupur
Punjab National Bank
2. Chandel
State Bank of India
3. Churachandpur
State Bank of India
4. Imphal East
Punjab National Bank
5. Imphal West
State Bank of India
6. Jiribam
Punjab National Bank
7. Kakching
State Bank of India
8. Kamjong
Punjab National Bank
9. Kangpokpi
State Bank of India
10. Noney
Punjab National Bank
11. Pherzawal
State Bank of India
12. Senapati
State Bank of India
13. Temenglong
Punjab National Bank
14. Tengnoupal
Punjab National Bank
15. Thoubal
State Bank of India
16. Ukhrul
Punjab National Bank
Meghalaya
State Bank of India
1. East Garo hills
State Bank of India
2. East Jaintia Hills
State Bank of India
3. East Khasi Hills
State Bank of India
4. Eastern West
Khasi Hills
Punjab National Bank
5. North Garo Hills
State Bank of India
6. Ri Bhoi
State Bank of India
7. South Garo Hills
State Bank of India
8. South West Garo
Hills
State Bank of India
9. South West Khasi
Hills
State Bank of India
10. West Garo hills
State Bank of India
11. West Jaintia
Hills
State Bank of India
12. West Khasi Hills
State Bank of India
Mizoram
State Bank of India
1. Aizawl
State Bank of India
2. Champhai
State Bank of India
3. Hnahthial
State Bank of India
4. Khawzawl
State Bank of India
5. Kolasib
State Bank of India
6. Lawngtlai
State Bank of India
7. Lunglei
State Bank of India
8. Mamit
State Bank of India
9. Saitual
State Bank of India
10. Serchhip
State Bank of India
11. Siaha
State Bank of India
Nagaland
State Bank of India
1. Chumoukedima
Bank of Baroda
2. Dimapur
State Bank of India
3. Kiphire
State Bank of India
4. Kohima
State Bank of India
5. Longleng
State Bank of India
6. Meluri
State Bank of India
7. Mokokchung
State Bank of India
8. Mon
State Bank of India
9. Niuland
State Bank of India
10. Noklak
State Bank of India
11. Peren
State Bank of India
12. Phek
State Bank of India
13. Shamator
State Bank of India
14. Tseminyu
State Bank of India
15. Tuensang
State Bank of India
16. Wokha
State Bank of India
17. Zunheboto
State Bank of India
Odisha
UCO Bank
1. Angul
UCO Bank
2. Balasore
UCO Bank
3. Bargah
State Bank of India
4. Bhadrak
UCO Bank
5. Bolangir
(Balangir)
State Bank of India
6. Boudh
State Bank of India
7. Cuttack
UCO Bank
8. Deogarh
State Bank of India
9. Dhenkanal
UCO Bank
10. Gajapati
Union Bank of India
11. Ganjam
Union Bank of India
12. Jagatsinghpur
UCO Bank
13. Jajpur
State Bank of India
14. Jharsuguda
State Bank of India
15. Kalahandi
State Bank of India
16. Kandhamal
State Bank of India
17. Kendrapara
State Bank of India
18. Keonjhar
Bank of India
19. Khurda
State Bank of India
20. Koraput
State Bank of India
21. Malkangiri
State Bank of India
22. Mayurbhanj
Bank of India
23. Nabarangpur
State Bank of India
24. Nayagarh
State Bank of India
25.  Nuapada
State Bank of India
26.  Puri
UCO Bank
27.  Rayagada
State Bank of India
28.  Sambalpur
State Bank of India
29.  Sonepur
State Bank of India
30.  Sundargarh
State Bank of India
Punjab
Punjab National
Bank
1. Amritsar
Punjab National Bank
2. Barnala
State Bank of India
3. Bhatinda
State Bank of India
4. Faridkot
Punjab & Sind Bank
5. Fategarh Sahib
State Bank of India
6. Fazilka
Punjab National Bank
7. Ferozepur
Punjab National Bank
8. Gurdaspur
Punjab National Bank
9. Hoshiarpur
Punjab National Bank
10. Jalandhar
UCO Bank
11. Kapurthala
Punjab National Bank
12. Ludhiana
Punjab & Sind Bank
13. Malerkotla
State Bank of India
14. Mansa
State Bank of India
15. Moga
Punjab & Sind Bank
16. Muktsar
State Bank of India
17. Nawanshahr
Punjab National Bank
18. Pathankot
Punjab National Bank
19. Patiala
State Bank of India
20. Ropar
UCO Bank
21. Sahibzada Ajit
Singh Nagar
(Mohali)
Punjab National Bank
22. Sangrur
State Bank of India
23. Tarn Taran
Punjab National Bank
Rajasthan
Bank of Baroda
1. Ajmer
Bank of Baroda
2. Alwar
Punjab National Bank
3. Anupgarh
Punjab National Bank
4. Balotra
State Bank of India
5. Banswara
Bank of Baroda
6. Baran
Central Bank of India
7. Barmer
State Bank of India
8. Beawar
Bank of Baroda
9. Bharatpur
Punjab National Bank
10. Bhilwara
Bank of Baroda
11. Bikaner
State Bank of India
12. Bundi
Bank of Baroda
13. Chittorgarh
Bank of Baroda
14. Churu
Bank of Baroda
15. Dausa
UCO Bank
16. Deeg
Punjab National Bank
17. Dholpur
Punjab National Bank
18. Didwana-
Kuchaman
UCO Bank
19. Dudu
UCO Bank
20. Dungarpur
Bank of Baroda
21. Gangapur City
Bank of Baroda
22. Hanumangarh
State Bank of India
23. Jaipur
Punjab National Bank
24. Jaipur Rural
State Bank of India
25. Jaisalmer
State Bank of India
26. Jalore
State Bank of India
27. Jhalawar
Central Bank of India
28. Jhunjhunu
Bank of Baroda
29. Jodhpur
Punjab National Bank
30. Jodhpur Rural
ICICI Bank
31. Kekri
Bank of Baroda
32. Khairthal-Tijara
Punjab National Bank
33. Karauli
Bank of Baroda
34. Kota
Central Bank of India
35. Kotputli-Behror
Punjab National Bank
36. Nagaur
UCO Bank
37. Neem Ka Thana
State Bank of India
38. Pali
State Bank of India
39. Phalodi
UCO Bank
40. Pratapgarh
Bank of Baroda
41. Rajsamand
State Bank of India
42. Salumber
ICICI Bank
43. Sanchore
State Bank of India
44. Sawai Madhopur Bank of Baroda
45. Shahpura
Bank of Baroda
46. Sikar
Punjab National Bank
47. Sirohi
State Bank of India
48. Sri Ganganagar
Punjab National Bank
49. Tonk
Bank of Baroda
50. Udaipur
State Bank of India
Sikkim
State Bank of India
1. Gangtok (Earlier
Name - East Sikkim)
State Bank of India
2. Gyalshing (Earlier
Name - West
Sikkim)
State Bank of India
3. Mangan (Earlier
Name - North
Sikkim)
State Bank of India
4. Namchi (Earlier
Name - South
Sikkim)
State Bank of India
5. Pakyong
Central Bank of India
6. Soreng
State Bank of India
Tamil Nadu
Indian Overseas
Bank
1. Ariyalur
State Bank of India
2. Chengalpattu
Indian Bank
3. Chennai
Indian Overseas Bank
4. Coimbatore
Canara Bank
5. Cuddalore
Indian Bank
6. Dharmapuri
Indian Bank
7. Dindigul
Canara Bank
8. Erode
Canara Bank
9. Kallakurichi
Indian Bank
10. Kanchipuram
Indian Bank
11. Kanyakumari
Indian Overseas Bank
12. Karur
Indian Overseas Bank
13. Krishnagiri
Indian Bank
14. Madurai
Canara Bank
15. Mayiladuthurai
Indian Overseas Bank
16. Nagapattinam
Indian Overseas Bank
17. Namakkal
Indian Bank
18. Nilgiris
Canara Bank
19. Perambalur
Indian Overseas Bank
20. Puddukottai
Indian Overseas Bank
21.
Ramanathapuram
Indian Overseas Bank
22. Ranipet
Indian Bank
23. Salem
State Bank of India
24. Sivaganga
Indian Overseas Bank
25. Tenkasi
Indian Overseas Bank
26. Thanjavur
Indian Overseas Bank
27. Theni
Canara Bank
28. Tiruchirapalli
Indian Overseas Bank
29. Tirunelveli
Indian Overseas Bank
30. Tirupathur
Indian Bank
31. Tiruppur
Canara Bank
32. Tiruvallur
Indian Bank
33. Tiruvannamalai
Indian Bank
34. Tiruvarur
Indian Overseas Bank
35. Tuticorin
State Bank of India
36. Vellore
Indian Bank
37. Viluppuram
Indian Bank
38. Virudhunagar
Indian Overseas Bank
Telangana
State Bank of India
1. Adilabad
State Bank of India
2. Bhadradri
State Bank of India
3. Hanumakonda
(earlier name -
Warangal (Urban))
State Bank of India
4. Hyderabad
State Bank of India
5. Jagitial
Union Bank of India
6. Jangaon (New)
State Bank of India
7. Jayashankar
State Bank of India
8. Jogulamba
Union Bank of India
9. Kamareddy
Canara Bank
10. Karimnagar
State Bank of India
11. Khammam
State Bank of India
12. Komram Bheem
State Bank of India
13. Mahabubabad
State Bank of India
14. Mahabubnagar
State Bank of India
15. Mancherial
Union Bank of India
16. Medak
State Bank of India
17. Medchal-
Malkajgiri
Canara Bank
18. Mulugu
State Bank of India
19. Nagarkurnool
Union Bank of India
20. Nalgonda
State Bank of India
21. Narayanpet
State Bank of India
22. Nirmal
State Bank of India
23. Nizamabad
State Bank of India
24. Peddapalli
Union Bank of India
25. Rajanna
Union Bank of India
26. Ranga Reddy
State Bank of India
27. Sangareddy
Canara Bank
28. Siddipet
Union Bank of India
29. Suryapet
State Bank of India
30. Vikarabad
State Bank of India
31. Wanaparthy
Union Bank of India
32. Warangal
(earlier name -
Warangal (Rural))
Union Bank of India
33. Yadadri
Canara Bank
Tripura
Punjab National
Bank
1. Dhalai
Punjab National Bank
2. Gomati
Punjab National Bank
3. Khowai
Punjab National Bank
4. North Tripura
Punjab National Bank
5. Sepahijala
Punjab National Bank
6. South Tripura
Punjab National Bank
7. Unakoti
Punjab National Bank
8. West Tripura
Punjab National Bank
Uttarakhand
State Bank of India
1. Almora
State Bank of India
2. Bageshwar
State Bank of India
3. Chamoli
State Bank of India
4. Champawat
State Bank of India
5. Dehradun
Punjab National Bank
6. Haridwar
Punjab National Bank
7. Nainital
Bank of Baroda
8. Pauri Garwal
State Bank of India
9. Pithoragarh
State Bank of India
10. Rudraprayag
State Bank of India
11. Tehri Garhwal
(New Tehri)
State Bank of India
12. Udham Singh
Nagar
Bank of Baroda
13. Uttar Kashi
State Bank of India
Uttar Pradesh
Bank of Baroda
1. Agra
Canara Bank
2. Aligarh
Canara Bank
3. Allahabad
Bank of Baroda
4. Ambedkar Nagar
Bank of Baroda
5. Auraiya
Central Bank of India
6. Azamgarh
Union Bank of India
7. Baghpat
Canara Bank
8. Bahraich
Indian Bank
9. Ballia
Central Bank of India
10. Balrampur
Indian Bank
11. Banda
Indian Bank
12. Barabanki
Bank of India
13. Bareilly
Bank of Baroda
14. Basti
State Bank of India
15. Bhim Nagar
Canara Bank
16. Bijnor
Punjab National Bank
17. Budaun
Punjab National Bank
18. Bulandshahr
Punjab National Bank
19. Chandauli
Union Bank of India
20. Chhtrapati
Sahuji Maharaj
Nagar
Bank of Baroda
21. Chitrakoot
Indian Bank
22. Deoria
Central Bank of India
23. Etah
Canara Bank
24. Etawah
Central Bank of India
25. Faizabad
Bank of Baroda
26. Farukhabad
Bank of India
27. Fatehpur
Bank of Baroda
28. Firozabad
State Bank of India
29. Gautam Buddha
Nagar
Canara Bank
30. Ghaziabad
Canara Bank
31.  Ghazipur
Union Bank of India
32.  Gonda
Indian Bank
33.  Gorakhpur
State Bank of India
34.  Hamirpur
Indian Bank
35.  Hardoi
Bank of India
36.  Jalaun
Indian Bank
37.  Jaunpur
Union Bank of India
38.  Jhansi
Punjab National Bank
39.  Jyotiba Phule
Nagar (Amroha)
Canara Bank
40.  Kannauj
Bank of India
41.  Kanpur Dehat-
Rural
Bank of Baroda
42.  Kanpur Nagar-
Urban
Bank of Baroda
43.  Kansi Ram
Nagar (Kasganj)
Canara Bank
44.  Kaushambi
Bank of Baroda
45.  Kushi Nagar
(Padrauna)
Central Bank of India
46.  Lakhimpur-Kheri Indian Bank
47.  Lalitpur
Punjab National Bank
48.  Lucknow
Bank of India
49.  Mahamaya
Nagar (Hathras)
Canara Bank
50.  Maharajganj
State Bank of India
51.  Mahoba
Indian Bank
52.  Mainpuri
Bank of India
53.  Mathura
Canara Bank
54.  Mau (Mau Nath
Bahnjan)
Union Bank of India
55.  Meerut
Canara Bank
56.  Mirzapur
Indian Bank
57.  Moradabad
Canara Bank
58.  Muzaffarnagar
Punjab National Bank
59.  Panchsheel
Nagar
Canara Bank
60.  Pilibhit
Bank of Baroda
61.  Prabudh Nagar
(Shamli)
Punjab National Bank
62.  Pratapgarh
Bank of Baroda
63.  Rae Bareli
Bank of Baroda
64.  Rampur
Bank of Baroda
65.  Saharanpur
Punjab National Bank
66.  Sant Kabir
Nagar
State Bank of India
67.  Sant Ravidas
Nagar (Bhadohi)
Union Bank of India
68.  Shahjahanpur
Bank of Baroda
69.  Shravasti
Indian Bank
70.  Siddharth nagar
State Bank of India
71.  Sitapur
Indian Bank
72.  Sonbhadra
Indian Bank
73.  Sultanpur
Bank of Baroda
74.  Unnao
Bank of India
75.  Varanasi
Union Bank of India
West Bengal
Punjab National
Bank
1. Alipurduar
Central Bank of India
2. Bankura
Punjab National Bank
3. Birbhum
UCO Bank
4. Cooch Behar
Central Bank of India
5. Dakshin Dinajpur
Punjab National Bank
6. Darjeeling
Central Bank of India
7. Hooghly
UCO Bank
8. Howrah
UCO Bank
9. Jalpaiguri
Central Bank of India
10. Jhargram
Punjab National Bank
11. Kalimpong
State Bank of India
12. Kolkata
State Bank of India
13. Malda
Punjab National Bank
14. Murshidabad
Punjab National Bank
15. Nadia
Punjab National Bank
16. North 24
Parganas
Indian Bank
17. Paschim
Bardhaman
State Bank of India
18. Pashchim
Medinapur
Punjab National Bank
19. Purba
Bardhaman
UCO Bank
20. Purba
Medinapur
Punjab National Bank
21. Purulia
Punjab National Bank
22. South 24
Parganas
Punjab National Bank
23. Uttar Dinajpur
Punjab National Bank
Andaman &
Nicobar
Islands
State Bank of India
1. Nicobar Islands
State Bank of India
2. North & Middle
Andaman
State Bank of India
3. South Andaman
State Bank of India
Chandigarh
Punjab National
Bank
1. Chandigarh
(Rural)
Punjab National Bank
Dadra and
Nagar Haveli
and Daman
and Diu
Bank of Baroda
1. Dadra and Nagar
Haveli
Bank of Baroda
2. Daman
State Bank of India
3. Diu
State Bank of India
Delhi
Punjab National
Bank
1. Central Delhi
Canara Bank
2. East Delhi
Punjab National Bank
3. New Delhi
Canara Bank
4. North Delhi
Punjab National Bank
5. North East Delhi
Punjab National Bank
6. North West Delhi
Punjab National Bank
7. Shahdara
Bank of Baroda
8. South Delhi
State Bank of India
9. South East Delhi
State Bank of India
10.South West Delhi State Bank of India
11. West Delhi
Canara Bank
Jammu and
Kashmir
The Jammu &
Kashmir Bank Ltd.
1. Anantnag
J & K Bank Ltd.
2. Bandipora
J & K Bank Ltd.
3. Baramulla
J & K Bank Ltd.
4. Budgam
J & K Bank Ltd.
5. Doda
State Bank of India
6. Ganderbal
J & K Bank Ltd.
7. Jammu
State Bank of India
8. Kathua
State Bank of India
9. Kishtwar
State Bank of India
10. Kulgam
J & K Bank Ltd.
11. Kupwara
J & K Bank Ltd.
12. Poonch
J & K Bank Ltd.
13. Pulwama
J & K Bank Ltd.
14. Rajouri
J & K Bank Ltd.
15. Ramban
State Bank of India
16. Reasi
State Bank of India
17. Samba
State Bank of India
18. Shopian
J & K Bank Ltd.
19. Srinagar
J & K Bank Ltd.
20. Udhampur
State Bank of India
Ladakh
State Bank of India
1. Kargil
State Bank of India
2. Leh
State Bank of India
Lakshadweep Canara Bank
1. Lakshadweep
Canara Bank
Puducherry
Indian Bank
1. Puducherry
Indian Bank
Annex II
SLBC/UTLBC Website- Indicative List of contents
Menu item
Sub Menu
Contents
Annex
About us
Background
SLBC as a coordinating forum for the
development of the state and its functioning -
Brief write up
SLBC-Members
SLBC members with their names and contact
details
II-1
State Profile Geographical
Map
Each district may be linked to the respective
district website of GOI at NIC portal so as to
get district details on clicking the respective
district name
Infrastructure
Power, Transport, Roads & Rail etc
Agriculture
Acreage under cultivation, Cropping pattern,
Irrigation facilities, Farm mechanisation,
allied activities, Dairy, Fisheries, Plantation,
Horticulture etc,
Industries
Industrialisation, Status of MSME, Sickness
of MSME, Reasons, Rehabilitation
Banking
Position of banked villages as compared to
total villages in each of the districts
II-2
SLBC
meetings
Calendar of
meetings
Schedule of SLBC meetings for the current
calendar year
II-3
SLBC-Meetings
held
Details of SLBC meetings held with agenda
and minutes
II-4
Lead Bank
Scheme
Lead Banks-
District wise
Details of Lead Banks with names of LDM
and their contact details
II-5
ACP-Targets
Annual Credit Plan - Targets for the year
II-6
ACP-
Achievements
Annual
Credit
Plan
Sector
wise
achievement
II-7
CD Ratio
Position of district wise CD ratio
II-8
Govt
Sponsored
Programmes
Central
Government
Sponsored
programmes
Brief description of each Central Government
sponsored
programme.
The
Central
Government sponsored scheme is to be
linked to RBI/GoI guidelines
State
Government
Sponsored
programmes
Brief description of each State Government
sponsored programme.
Banking
Network
Banking
Network-
Summary
Mode of Banking Services
II-9
Banking outlets-
Branches-
details
District wise particulars of branches
II-10
Banking outlets-
BCs-details
District wise particulars of BC outlets
II-11
Particulars of
Banking
Services
District wise banking services provided
through Other Modes
II-12
through Other
Modes
Financial
Inclusion
SHG bank
linkage
Bank wise position of savings and credit
linked number of SHGs
II-13
FLCs
Database on FLCs
II-14
RSETIs
District wise position of RSETIs
II-15
Submission
of data
Web based
interface
Submission of data by Lead Banks and
controlling office of banks to SLBC
Links
Links to related
website
Link to RBI, NABARD, respective State
Government, IBA, Banking Ombudsman,
Banks and other related websites
Annex II-1
SLBC-List of Members
Updated as on -----
SR Name Designation
Organisation
Contact Details
Remarks
Tel email Address
Annex II-2
Banking services-Villages covered
Quarter ended -----
SR District
Name
District
Code
(BSR)
Total no. of Villages
No. of villages which
are having banking
outlets
(BR/BC/Other)
Remarks
>2000
<2000 >5000 >2000 <2000 >5000
TOTAL
Annex II-3
SLBC -Calendar of meetings for the calendar year --------
Year
Quarter
Scheduled Date of
meeting
Remarks
dd.mm.yyyy
Annex II-4
SLBC - Details of meetings held
SLBC
meeting
no.*
Date of
meeting
-Agenda
linked
Attended by (Name &
Designation)
Minutes
of the
meeting
Schedul
ed date
meeting
as per
calendar
mar
RBI
Convenor
Bank
GOI
State
Govt
dd.mm.y
yyy
minutes
dd.mm.yy
* SLBC meetings held after April 2010
Annex II-5
Details of Lead Banks
Quarter ended -----
SR District
Name
District
code
(BSR)
Name of
Lead
Bank
Name
of LDM
Designation
Contact Details
Rem
arks
Tel email
Address
Annex II-6
Annual Credit Plan-Targets for the year --------
District Name (Amount in thousands)
Bank
Name
ric
ult
ure
Exp
ort
Cre
dit
uca
tion
usi
Social
Infras
tructu
Rene
wable
Energ
Priorit
Subto
tal
Non-
Prio
rity
Total
Commer
cial
Banks-
Sub Total
RRBs-
Sub Total
Cooperat
ive
Banks-
Sub Total
Small
Finance
Banks-
Sub Total
Wholly
Owned
Subsidiar
ies
(WOS) of
Foreign
Banks-
Sub-
Total
All
banks-
Total
Annex II-7
Annual Credit Plan - Achievement
Quarter ended ----- (Amount in thousands)
Bank Name
Agri
cult
ure
Exp
ort
Cre
dit
Edu
cati
usi
Soc
ial
Infr
astr
uct
ure
Ren
ewa
ble
Ener
Pri
orit
bto
tal
Pri
orit
y -
Tot
Commercial
Banks-Sub
Total
RRBs-Sub
Total
Cooperative
Banks-Sub
Total
Small
Finance
Banks-Sub
Total
Wholly
Owned
Subsidiaries
(WOS) of
Foreign
Banks-Sub
Total
All banks-
Total
Annex II-8
Credit Deposit Ratio
Quarter ended ------- (Amount in thousands)
District
Name
District
code
Deposit Credit CD Ratio Remarks
Annex II-9
Banking Network-Summary
Quarter ended -----
Bank Name
Mode of Banking Services
Remarks
Branch
Other
Modes
Total
Commercial
Banks-Sub Total
RRBs-Sub Total
Cooperative
Banks-Sub Total
Small Finance
Banks-Sub Total
Wholly Owned
Subsidiaries
(WOS) of
Foreign Banks-
Sub Total
Payments
Banks-Sub Total
All banks-Total
Annex II-10
Particulars of Banking outlets- Branches
Quarter ended -----
SR Distric
Name
Distric
Code(
BSR)
Block Localit
y/Villag
Populatio
classificat
ion
(M/U/SU/R
Bank
Name
Branc
Name
Date of
openin
Contac
Details
Add
res
rks
dd.mm.
yyyy
Annex II-11
Particulars of Banking outlets- BCs
Quarter ended -----
District
Name
Blo
Local
ity/
Villa
Populat
ion
classifi
cation
(M/U/S
U/R)
Bank
Name
Base
Branch
Name
Date
openi
ng of
outlet
Tel no.
of BC
Rem
arks
dd.mm
.yyyy
Annex II-12
Particulars of Banking Services provided through Other Modes
Quarter ended -----
Distri
Nam
Bloc
Loc
ality
Vill
age
Populat
ion
classifi
cation
(M/U/S
U/R)
Bank
Nam
Specify
Type of
mode
(Rural
ATM/
Mobile
van/
Other
Date
open
ing
Name
Contact
Official
Tel no.
Contact
Official
Rem
arks
dd.m
m.yyy
Annex II-13
SHG bank linkage programme
Quarter ended ----- (No. in actuals, Amount in thousands)
Bank Name
Savings linked
Credit Linked
No. of
SHGs
Amount
outstanding
No. of
SHGs
Amount
outstanding
Commercial Banks-Sub Total
RRBs-Sub Total
Cooperative Banks-Sub
Total
Small Finance Banks-Sub
Total
Wholly Owned Subsidiaries
(WOS) of Foreign Banks-Sub
Total
All banks-Total
Annex II-14
Database on FLCs
FLC
Cod
Distric
Date of
openin
Locatio
(Metro,
Urban,
Semi-
urban
or rural)
Premise
s (Bank
branch,
LDM
office,
RSETI,
Indepen
dent)
Addre
ss of
FLC
Spon
sor
Bank
Wheth
er Run
Trust
or run
directl
y by
spons
bank
Name(s)
of FL
Counsello
r(s)
Cont
act
No(s)
Email
FLC
Helpline
*Note: FLC Code will be a unique five digit code with the first three digits being the district
code (Refer sheet titled District Master) and the last two digits represent the FLC Code to
be given by SLBC Convenor banks starting from 01 and running sequentially thereafter for
each district (For eg. if there are four FLCs in a district, the FLC code will be in the form
xxx01, xxx02, xxx03 and xxx04 where xxx represents the district code as per district master
sheet)
Annex II-15
Position of RSETI
Quarter ended -----
SR District Location
of RSETI
Sponsoring
Bank
Date of
opening
Name
Contact
official
Contact Details
Rema
rks
Tel email Address
Annex III
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for Data Flow at LBS Fora
Head Office (HO) of each bank shall generate the report, pertaining to LBS related
data and data available on CBS/ MIS, in the prescribed format, which includes
columns of District Name, Block name, District code & Block code by 15th of
succeeding month following the end of the quarter.
ii.
HO of each bank shall provide the district & block level report in prescribed format
to controlling offices of bank working at state level.
iii.
Each SLBC shall ensure that their data feeding website/web portal is having a
provision for uploading the data by controlling offices of each bank in prescribed
format.
iv.
Each Banks’ Controlling Office at state level responsible to feed the data in
respective state shall upload the data in SLBC portal by 20th of succeeding month
of the end of the quarter.
Data pertaining to State Government/ Other data (which are not available on CBS
or MIS of the bank) would be collated & uploaded by Controlling Office/ Lead
District Manager (LDM) as is being done now, in SLBC web portal by 20th of
succeeding month of the end of the quarter.
vi.
SLBC Convenor bank should provide the access to LDMs of respective state on
SLBC web portal to download the block wise data of their respective district.
vii.
SLBC Convenor bank should provide the access to controlling office of respective
state on SLBC web portal to download the uploaded data to verify the correctness
of data.
Role of Banks’ Head Offices
• Banks’ HOs shall generate the district wise and block wise data of each state in
the prescribed format.
• Banks’ HOs shall ensure that the mapping of their branches to the block level has
been carried out.
• HO of each bank shall provide the report in prescribed format to controlling office
of bank working at state level.
• The state code, district code & block code should be as per the Government of
India’s census 2011 data.
• The amount column in the report should be provided in the actual figure and not it
lakhs, crores, billions or millions etc.
Role of Controlling Office of Bank working at state level
• Each Banks’ controlling office at state level responsible to feed the data in
respective state must upload the data in SLBC portal of that state.
• For Data pertaining to State Government/ Other data (which is not available on
CBS or MIS of the bank), controlling office of the bank at state level will collate the
data in format given by SLBC of that state & upload the same on the SLBC portal.
Role of SLBC Convenor Bank
• SLBC Convenor bank must ensure that their data feeding website/web portal is
having a provision for uploading the data in approved format by controlling office
of each bank working at state level.
• There are 29 formats (flat files) for the data pertains to CBS or available through
MIS of the bank.
• Other than formats mentioned above, there are 04 excel formats for data pertains
to FLCs & RSETI, which is required to be collected from the controlling office of
banks at state level.
• For Data pertaining to State Government/ Other data (which is not available on
CBS or MIS of the bank), SLBC Convenor bank may follow their existing procedure
or devise the new procedure.
• SLBC Convenor bank must ensure that LDMs are able to access web portal of
SLBC to download the block wise data of their respective district.
• SLBC Convenor bank should provide the access to controlling offices of banks of
respective state on SLBC web portal to download the uploaded data to verify the
correctness of data.
• SLBC Convenor bank must ensure that their data feeding website/web portal is
having a provision for uploading the block wise ACP target data in approved format
by LDMs of that state.
Role of Lead District Managers (LDMs)
• LDMs must upload the block wise ACP target of the district on SLBC portal of the
state, by 15th April of the starting of the financial year.
• LDMs shall download the block wise information of district for review purpose.
The flow chart describing the procedure to be followed in this regard is as follows.
FLOW CHART
Start
Data pertain to LBS or
available on CBS
Complete
Each Banks’ controlling office of
particular state will collate &
upload the data in website/web
portal of SLBC of that state
concerned
Yes
HO of each bank will
generate the data in
HO of each bank will provide the district
& block level report in approved format
to controlling office of bank working at
state level.
Each SLBC should have facility in their
website/portal
for
uploading
approved format by controlling office of
banks at state level
Each
Banks’
controlling
office
particular state will upload the data in
website/web portal of that state.
LDMs of the state to be provided the
access to SLBC website/portal for
downloading the district and block
level data & uploading the yearly block
wise ACP target of the district, data like
RSETIs/ FLCs etc.
LBS – MIS Annex IV
Statement showing Achievement vis-à-vis Targets under the Annual Credit Plan (ACP) for the quarter ended ____
Name of the State/Union Territory: No. of accounts in actuals, Amount in thousands
Sr. No
Sector
(A) Public Sector Banks (B) Private Sector Banks (C) Regional Rural Banks (D) Small Finance Banks
(E) Rural Cooperative Banks (StCBs and DCCBs)
Total (A+B+C+D+E)
ACP Target (Fixed
Annual)
Achievement
(Disbursement) upto
the end of current
quarter
% Achievement
(Disbursement)
Amount O/s
ACP Target (Fixed
Annual)
Achievement
(Disbursement) upto
the end of current
quarter
% Achievement
(Disbursement)
Amount O/s
No. of
Acc.
Amount
No. of
Acc.
Amount
No. of
Acc.
Amount
No. of
Acc.
Amount
No. of
Acc.
Amount
No. of
Acc.
Amount
No. of
Acc.
Amount
No. of
Acc.
Amount
Priority Sector (1A+1B+1C+1D+1E+1F+1G+1H)
Agriculture= 1A(i)+1A(ii)+1A (iii)
1A(i)
Farm Credit
1A(ii)
Agriculture Infrastructure
1A(iii)
Ancillary Activities
Out of 1A(iii) above, loans upto 50 crore to Start-ups
engaged in Agri & Allied services
Out of Agriculture, loans to Small & Marginal Farmers
MSMEs = 1B(i)+1B(ii)+1B(iii)+1B(iv)
1B(i)
Micro Enterprises (Manufacturing + Service) (including
Khadi & Village Industries)
1B(ii)
Small Enterprises (Manufacturing + Service)
1B(iii)
Medium Enterprises (Manufacturing + Service)
1B(iv)
Other finance to MSMEs (As indicated in Master
Direction on PSL)
Out of 1B(iv) above, loans upto 50 crores to Start-ups)
Export Credit
Education
Housing
Social Infrastructure
Renewable Energy
Others
Out of 1H above, loans upto 50 crore to Start-ups (other
than Agri/ MSME)
Sub total Priority Sector Lending =
1A+1B+1C+1D+1E+1F+1G+1H
Loans to weaker Sections under PSL
Out of 3 above, loans to individual women beneficiaries
up to ₹1 lakh
Non-Priority Sector (4A+4B+4C+4D+4E)
Agriculture
Education
Housing
Personal Loans under Non-Priority Sector
Others
Sub-total Non-Priority Sector Lending =
4A+4B+4C+4D+4E
Total=2+5
Annex V
Compendium of instructions - District Level Review Committee (DLRC)
Preamble: The District Level Review Committee (DLRC), a district level forum under
the aegis of Lead Bank Scheme, primarily aims at facilitating stakeholders to
undertake review of the district level credit plans and to devise workable solutions for
enhancing flow of credit to deserving sectors, besides serving as a platform for Public
Representatives to share their valuable feedback for improvising strategy.
Objectives: DLRC forum shall function with the objective of evaluating the progress
made in the implementation of Schemes included in District Credit Plan/ Annual Action
Plan, identifying problem areas and devising suitable remedial steps. The forum shall
act as a platform for public representatives to share their views and opinions on credit
needs of the districts and issues and concerns relating to banking services etc. While
the objective of the DCC is to serve as a coordination and implementation forum, the
DLRC is expected to serve as a review forum.
Composition: The DLRC forum shall be chaired by the District Collector/ District
Magistrate and attended by all members of the District Consultative Committee (DCC).
Public representatives (MPs/ MLAs/ Zilla Panchayat Chiefs) shall invariably invited to
DLRC meetings. The forum may also have representatives of State Minority
Commission, SC/ ST Corporation and representatives of the group of beneficiaries of
rural lending. The forum may also consider inviting people with the expertise in the
fields, such as progressive farmers and local industrialists as special invitees.
The office of the Lead District Manager (LDM) shall be responsible for convening the
meetings of DRLCs and for providing secretarial support for smooth functioning of the
forum.
Frequency of the meetings: DLRC meetings may be held on a quarterly basis, as
hitherto.
Indicative agenda: The primary aim of the DLRC forum shall be to review the
performance under the aggregated district credit plan on a regular basis. The forum
shall also undertake review of lending to priority sectors, Government Sponsored
Schemes, performance of banks under various micro insurance and investment
schemes launched by the Govt. of India.
As the DLRC forum has public representatives as members who are well versed with
the ground realities, their views and opinions on the credit needs of the district may be
obtained and the same may be considered during the preparation of Potential Linked
Plan (PLP) by NABARD. Responses to queries from public representatives need to
be accorded highest priority and attended to promptly.
General instructions:
• Since public representative are the most important constituents of the DLRC forum,
Lead banks must fix dates of DLRC meetings taking into account the convenience
of the MPs and circulate the agenda papers to MPs well in advance.
• Lead banks should invariably invite MPs and other public representatives in
functions conducted by banks in the districts such as opening of new branches,
distribution of KCCs, SHG credit linkage programmes etc.
• Deliberations in the DLRC forum may be held as per the indicative agenda. All
other issues such as review of FIP, issues related to IT enabled FI, monitoring of
FLCs and RSETIs, scaling up FL efforts, enhancing/augmenting farmers’ income ,
SHG/ SME financing etc. should be deliberated in DCC as per extant instructions.
• Lead Banks should prepare an Annual Schedule of DLRC meetings on Calendar
year basis for all districts in consultation with the Chairperson of the meetings, Lead
District Officer of the RBI and Public Representatives. This yearly Calendar should
be prepared in the beginning of each year and circulated to all members as
advance intimation for blocking future dates to attend the DLRC meetings and the
meetings should be conducted as per the calendar. While preparing the Calendar,
it should be ensured that DCC and DLRC meetings are not held simultaneously.
• As per extant instructions on LBS, a pre-PLP meeting is required to be convened
by LDM during June every year to be attended by banks, Government agencies,
etc., to obtain their views and concerns regarding credit potential (sector/ activity-
wise) and deliberate on major financial and socio-economic developments in the
district in the last one year and priorities to be set out for inclusion in the PLP. With
a view to gain valuable insights on credit needs of the districts from public
representatives who are well versed with the ground realities, DLRC for June
quarter may be held prior to the pre-PLP meeting.
Appendix I
List of Circulars/ /Guidelines/ Instructions
Sr.
No.
Circular No.
Date
Subject
1. FIDD.CO.LBS.No.
S1416/02.01.014/2022-23
January 3,
Expanding and Deepening of the
Digital Payments Ecosystem
2. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.No.22/0
2.01.001/2019-20
March 30,
Amalgamation of Public Sector Banks
Assignment
SLBC/
UTLBC
Convenorship
and
Lead
Bank
responsibilities
3. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.No.20/0
2.01.001/2019-20
March 26,
Formation of new Union Territory of
The Dadra and Nagar Haveli and
Daman and Diu – Assignment of
UTLBC Convenorship
4. FIDD.CO.LBS. No.1797 /
02.01.001 / 2019-20
February
27, 2020
Inclusion
Wholly
Owned
Subsidiaries (WOS) of Foreign Banks
under Lead Bank Scheme
5. FIDD.CO.LBS. No.1551 /
02.01.001 / 2019-20
January
23, 2020
Expanding and Deepening of Digital
Payments Ecosystem
6. FIDD.CO.LBS. No.1488 /
02.01.001 / 2019-20
January
13, 2020
National
Strategy
for
Financial
Inclusion
(NSFI):
2019-2024
Universal Access to Financial Services
7. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.No.16/0
2.01.001/2019-20
December
26, 2019
Formation of new Union Territory of
Jammu and Kashmir and Union
Territory of Ladakh – Assignment of
UTLBC Convenorship
8. FIDD.CO.LBS. No.1036 /
02.01.001 / 2019-20
November
20, 2019
Extension of Kisan Credit Card (KCC)
Scheme to Animal Husbandry Farmers
and Fisheries
9. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.No.13/
02.01.001/2019-20
October 7,
Expanding and Deepening of Digital
Payments Ecosystem
10. FIDD.CO.LBS. No.475 /
02.01.001 / 2019-20
August 27,
Recommendations of the High-Level
Committee on Deepening of Digital
Payments – Constitution of a Sub-
Committee on Digital Payments
11. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.
No.09/02.01.001/2019-20
August 13,
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme
– Implementation
12. FIDD.CO,LBS. No.387 /
02.01.001 / 2019-20
August 07,
Financing of projects under Agri-clinics
and Agri-business center scheme –
Review at meetings
13. FIDD.CO.LBS. No.21 /
02.01.001 / 2019-20
July 03,
Revamp of Lead Bank Scheme –
Action Points for SLBC Convenor
Banks/ Lead Banks – Developing a
Standardized system for data flow and
its management by SLBC/ UTLBC
Convenor Banks on SLBC/ UTLBC
websites
Sr.
No.
Circular No.
Date
Subject
14. FIDD.CO.LBS. No.2595 /
02.01.001 / 2018-19
June 24,
Aligning
roadmap
for
unbanked
villages having population more than
5000 with revised guidelines on Branch
Authorization Policy – Regional Rural
Banks
15. FIDD.CO.LBS. No.2431 /
02.01.001 / 2018-19
May 28,
Payments Banks – Participation under
Lead Bank Scheme
16. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC. No.16 /
02.01.001 / 2018-19
March 25,
Assignment
SLBC/UTLBC
Convenorship – State of Gujarat and
Union Territories of Daman & Diu and
Dadra & Nagar Haveli
17.
FIDD.CO.LBS.
No.3712/02.01.001/2017-
June 05,
Roadmap for opening banking outlets
in villages with population more than
5000 without a bank branch of a
scheduled commercial bank
18. FIDD.CO.LBS.
No.3671/02.01.001/2017-
May 30,
Lead Bank Scheme – Strengthening of
Monitoring Information System (MIS)
19. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.
No.20/02.01.001/2017-18
April 06,
Action Points for Lead Banks on
Enhancing the Effectiveness of Lead
District Managers (LDMs)
20. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.No.19/0
2.01.001/2017-18
April 06,
Revamp of Lead Bank Scheme - Action
Points for SLBC Convenor Banks/
Lead Banks
21. FIDD.CO.LBS. No.3017 /
02.01.001 / 2017-18
April 02,
Small Finance Banks – Participation
under Lead Bank Scheme
22. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.
No.31/02.01.001/2016-17
June 08,
Circular on Aligning roadmap for
unbanked villages with population
more
than
with
revised
Guidelines on Branch Authorisation
Policy.
23. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.
No.16/02.01.001/2016-17
September
29, 2016
Doubling of Farmers’ Income by 2022 -
Measures
24. FIDD.CO.LBS. No.5673/
02.01.001/2015-16
May 20,
Lead Bank Scheme- strengthening of
Monitoring Information System (MIS)
25. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC. No.17/
02.01.001/2015-16
January
14, 2016
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme
– Seeding of Aadhaar in Bank
Accounts- Clarification
26. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.
No.82/02.01.001/2015-16
December
31, 2015
Roadmap for opening brick and mortar
branches in villages with population
more than 5000 without a bank branch
of a scheduled commercial bank
27. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. No.
93 /02.01.001/2013-14
March 14,
Annual Credit Plans – Potential Linked
Plan (PLPs) prepared by NABARD
28. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. No.
11 /02.01.001/2013-14
July 09,
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme
– Implementation - Guidelines
29. RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.12/
02.08.001/2013-14
July 11,
Assignment
Lead
Bank
Responsibility
districts
Metropolitan Areas
Sr.
No.
Circular No.
Date
Subject
30. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. No.
75 /02.01.001/2012-13
May 10,
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme
– Implementation
31. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. No.
68 /02.01.001/2012-13
March 19,
Lead Bank Scheme – Strengthening of
Monitoring Information System
32. RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.
No.86/02.01.001/2011-12
June 19,
Roadmap-Provision
banking
services in villages with population
below 2000
33. RPCD. CO. LBS. B.C. No.
68/02.01.001/2011-12
March 29,
SLBC Website - Standardization of
information / data
34. RPCD. CO. LBS. B.C. No.
67/02.01.001/2011-2012
March 20,
Lead
Bank
Scheme
District
Consultative
Committee
(DCC)
Inclusion of Director of MSME-DI
35. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC.
No.60 /02.08.001/2011-12
February
17, 2012
Lead Bank Scheme - Participation of
public representatives like MP/MLA/
ZP Chiefs in District Level Review
Committee (DLRC) meetings
36. RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.74
/02.19.010/2010-11
May 30,
Resolution
issues
regarding
allocation of villages under Electronic
Benefit Transfer (EBT) scheme and
roadmap
for
providing
banking
services in villages with population
above 2000 under Financial Inclusion
Plan (FIP)
37. RPCD.CO.LBS.BC. No.44
/02.19.10/2010-11
December
29, 2010
Lead Bank Scheme – Conduct of State
Level
Bankers'
Committee
(SLBC)/Union Territory Level Bankers'
Committee (UTLBC) meetings
38. RPCD.CO.LBS.HLC.BC.
No. 21/02.19.10/2010-11
September
16, 2010
High Level Committee to Review Lead
Bank
scheme-
Providing
banking
services
every
village
having
population of over 2000
39. RPCD.CO.LBS.BC. No.15
/02.19.10/2010-11
July 26,
Lead Bank Scheme - Revitalising
SLBC Meetings
40. RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.57/
02.19.10/2009-2010
March 02,
Report of the High Level Committee to
Review
Lead
Bank
Scheme
Implementation
the
Recommendations - Lead banks and
SCBs
41. RPCD.CO.LBS.HLC.BC.N
o.56 /02.19.10/2009-10
February
26, 2010
Report of the High Level Committee to
Review
Lead
Bank
Scheme
Implementation
the
Recommendations - SLBC Convenor
banks
42. RPCD. CO. LBS. HLC.BC.
No. 43/02.19.10/2009-10
November
27, 2009
High Level Committee to review LBS-
Providing banking services in every
village having population of over 2000
by March 2011
43. RPCD.LBS.CO.BC.
No.111/02.13.03/2008-09
June 02,
Sub-Committee of SLBC for Export
Promotion
Sr.
No.
Circular No.
Date
Subject
44. RPCD.LBS.CO.BC. No.79/
02.01.01/2008-2009
December
30, 2008
Inclusion of issues pertaining to MSME
Sector in SLBC meeting
45. RPCD.LBS.CO.No.
10911/02.02.01/ 2006-07
May 22,
Credit Deposit Ratio – Implementation
of the recommendations of Expert
Group on CD Ratio - Clarifications
46. RPCD.LBS.CO.BC. No.33
/02.18.02/2006-07
November
15, 2006
Lead Bank Scheme - Inclusion of
National Horticulture Board as a
permanent member of SLBC of the
respective State
47. RPCD. LBS. BC. No.20
/02.01.01/2006-07
August 30,
Financial Inclusion by extension of
banking
services
with
'No
Frills'
accounts and issue of GCC
48. RPCD. LBS. BC. No.52
/02.02.001/2005-06
December
06, 2005
Financing of projects under Agri clinics
& Agri Business Centres Scheme –
Review at meetings
49. RPCD. No. LBS. BC. 50
/02.01.01/2005-06
December
06, 2005
Participation in various fora under Lead
Bank Scheme
50. RPCD.
CO.LBS.
BC.
No.47 /02.01.001/2005-06
November
09, 2005
Credit Deposit Ratio - Implementation
of recommendations of expert group
on CD Ratio
51. RPCD.
CO.LBS.
BC.
No.11 /02.01.001/2005-06
July 06,
Participation
MPs/Public
Representatives in DLRC meetings -
Functions relating to Self Help Groups
(SHGs) Credit Linkage Programme
52. RPCD.
CO.LBS.
BC.
No.93 /02.01.001/2004-05
April 11,
Rural lending - ACPs based on the
Potential
Linked
Plans
(PLPs)
prepared by NABARD
53. RPCD.
CO.LBS.
BC.
No.76 /02.01.001/2004-05
January
28, 2005
Participation of private sector banks
under various fora under Lead Bank
Scheme
54. RPCD.LBS(SAA).BC.
No.62 /08.01.00/2004-05
December
08, 2004
Relaxation in Service Area Norms
55.
RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. No.5
/02.01.001/2004-05
July 16,
Lead Bank Scheme - Participation of
Members of Parliament and Public
Representatives
District
Level
Review Committee (DLRC) meetings
56. RPCD.
CO.LBS.
BC.
No.56 /02.01.001/2003-04
December
20, 2003
Credit Flow to Boost Economic Growth
57. RPCD.
CO.LBS.
BC.
No.14 /02.01.001/2003-04
July 29,
Convening DLRC meetings - Late
submission of reports by lead banks
58.
RPCD.
CO.LBS.
BC.
No.59 /02.01.001/2002-03
January
06, 2003
Lead Bank Scheme - Participation of
Members of Parliament and Public
Representatives
District
Level
Review Committee (DLRC) meetings
59. RPCD.
CO.LBS.
BC.
No.106
/02.01.001/2001-
June 14,
Lead Bank Scheme - Participation of
Members of Parliament and Public
Sr.
No.
Circular No.
Date
Subject
Representatives
District
Level
Review Committee (DLRC) meetings
60.
RPCD.
CO.LBS.
BC.
No.85 /02.01.001/2000-01
May 09,
Lead Bank Scheme - Participation of
Members of Parliament and Public
Representatives
District
Level
Review Committee (DLRC) meetings
61.
RPCD.
CO.LBS.
BC.
No.81 /02.01.001/2000-01
April 27,
Lead Bank Scheme - Convening of
DLRC Meetings on Quarterly Basis -
Monitoring thereof
62.
RPCD.LBS.BC.32/02.01.0
1/2000-01
November
03, 2000
Lead Bank Scheme - Holding of District
Level Review Committee Meeting
63.
RPCD.No.LBS.BC.86/02.0
1.01/1996-97
December
16, 1996
Inclusion of National Commission for
Scheduled Castes/Tribes in State
Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs)
64.
RPCD.No.LBS.BC.13/02.0
1.01/1996-97
July 19,
Inclusion of Representatives of Khadi
and
Village
Industries
Commission/Boards in SLBC/DCC
65. RPCD.No.LBS.BC.118/02.
01.01/94-95 February 18,
February
18, 1995
Credit Deposit Ratio of Banks in Rural
and Semi-urban Areas
66. RPCD.No.LBS.BC.112/LB
C.34/88-89
April 28,
State Level Bankers' Committee -
Meetings
67. RPCD.No.LBS.BC.12/65/8
8-89
August 11,
Service Area Approach - Constitution
of Block Level Bankers' Committees
68.
RPCD.No.LBS.BC.100/5
5-87/88
April 22,
Lead Bank Scheme - District Credit
Plan - Annual Action Plan
69.
RPCD.No.LBS.BC.87/65-
87/88
March 14,
Rural Lending - Service Area of Bank
Branches
70.
RPCD.No.LBS.BC.69/LB
S.34-87/88
December
14, 1987
Review of the Annual Action Plans by
State
Level
Bankers
Committees
(SLBCs)
71.
RPCD.No.LBS.524/55-
86/87
April 28,
Lead Bank Scheme - Preparation of
District Credit Plans/Annual Action
Plans
72.
RPCD.No.LBS.430/55/86
-87
March 03,
Lead Bank Scheme - District Credit
Plans - Guidelines for Fourth Round
73.
RPCD.No.LBC.363/1-84
November
02, 1984
Integration of Annual Action Plans
(AAPs) with the Performance Budgets
of Bank Branches
74.
RPCD.No.LBC.162/1-84
September
06, 1984
Integration of Annual Action Plans
(AAPs) with the Performance Budgets
of Bank Branches
Sr.
No.
Circular No.
Date
Subject
75.
RPCD.No.LBC.135/55-84  August 30,
Lead Bank Scheme - Annual Action
Plan
for
Guidelines
for
Formulation of
76.
RPCD.No.LBC.96/1-84
January
18, 1984
Lead Bank Scheme - Appointment of
Lead Bank Officer - District Co-
ordinators
77.
RPCD.No.LBC.739/1-83
August 04,
Recommendations of the Working
Group to Review the Working of the
Lead Bank Scheme
78.
RPCD.No.3096/C.517-
82/83
April 13,
Convenorship of the State Level
Bankers' Committees
79.
DBOD.No.
BP.B.
74/C/462(E.9)-80
June 18,
Credit Deposit Ratio of banks in Rural
and Semi-Urban Areas
80.
DBOD.NO.TEP.20/C.517
-77
February
02, 1977
State Level Bankers’ Committee
81.
DBOD.No.
BD.2955/
C.168-70
August 11,
Lead Bank Scheme
82.
DBOD.No.
BD4327/
C.168-169
December
23, 1969
Branch
Expansion
Programme-
Allocation of Districts under the Lead
Bank Scheme
Appendix II
Other References of Directions / Circulars Relevant to Lead Bank Scheme
Sr.
No.
Reference No
Date
Subject
FIDD.GSSD.CO.BC.No.0
9/09.01.01/2022-23
July 20,
Master
Circular
Deendayal
Antyodaya Yojana - National Rural
Livelihoods
Mission
(DAY-NRLM)
[Public Sector Banks, Private Sector
Banks
(including
Small
Finance
Banks)]
FIDD.CO.Plan.BC.5/04.0
9.01/2020-21
September
04, 2020
(updated
as on
October
20, 2022)
Master Directions - Priority Sector
Lending
(PSL)
Targets
and
Classification [All Commercial Banks
including Regional Rural Banks, Small
Finance Banks, Local Area Banks and
Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
other than Salary Earners’ Banks]
FIDD.CO.FID.BC.No.1/12
.01.033/2022-23
April 01,
Master Circular on SHG-Bank Linkage
Programme [All SCBs]
FIDD.GSSD.BC.No.11/09
.10.001/2022-23
August 02,
Master Circular on Credit Facilities to
Minority
Communities
[All
SCBs
(excluding RRBs and Foreign banks
with less than 20 branches)]
FIDD.CO.GSSD.BC.No.1
0/09.09.001/2022-23
August 01,
Master Circular - Credit Facilities to
Scheduled Castes (SCs) & Scheduled
Tribes (STs) [All SCBs (including
Small Finance Banks)]
FIDD.GSSD.CO.BC.No.0
3/09.16.03/2021-22
April 05,
Deendayal
Antyodaya
Yojana
National Urban Livelihoods Mission
(DAY-NULM) [All SCBs & SFBs]
DBR.RRB.BL.BC. No.40 /
31.01.002 / 2018-19
May 31,
Rationalisation
Branch
Authorisation Policy – Revision of
Guidelines (RRBs)
FIDD.CO.FSD.BC
No.9/05.10.001/2018-19
October
17, 2018
Master Direction – Reserve Bank of
India (Relief Measures by Banks in
Areas affected by Natural Calamities)
Directions 2018 – SCBs (including
SFBs and excluding RRBs)
FIDD.CO.FSD.BC.
No.10/05.10.001/2018-19
October
17, 2018
Master Direction – Reserve Bank of
India (Relief Measures by Banks in
Areas affected by Natural Calamities)
Directions 2018 – RRBs
Sr.
No.
Reference No
Date
Subject
FIDD.MSME
NFS.
12/06.02.31/2017-18
July 24,
(updated
as on July
29, 2022)
Master Direction - Lending to Micro,
Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME)
Sector [all SCBs (excluding RRBs)]
FIDD.
FLC.
BC.
No.
11/12.01.018/2017-18
July 13,
Financial Literacy by FLCs (Financial
Literacy Centres) and rural branches -
Revision in funding limits, Audio-visual
content and provision of hand held
projectors [Scheduled Commercial
Banks (Including RRBs & Small
Finance Banks)]
FIDD.CO.SFB.No.9/04.0
9.001/ 2017-18
July 06,
Small Finance Banks – Compendium
of Guidelines on Financial Inclusion
and Development.
DBR.No.
BAPD.BC.69/22.01.001/2
016-17
May 18,
Rationalisation
Branch
Authorisation
Policy-
Revision
Guidelines
[All
Domestic
SCBs
(excluding RRBs), SFBs Payments
Banks and LABs]